---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Ten - Tyranny Of The Balance Sheet"
date:   2015-01-10 16:20:03
categories: book
---
AS YOU READ this, you may well be sipping a mug of tea. On the face of it, tea is one of the simplest drinks on the market. Unlike most soft drinks, for example, it’s made from a few basic natural ingredients.

A few tea leaves, perhaps crushed up and wrapped inside a paper tea bag, some boiling water, and that’s it. Simple to produce, you might imagine. But is it? What processes are involved in delivering that tea into your cup?

In the first place, tea-plantation workers in Sri Lanka, India, or Bangladesh farm and collect the tea leaves which are then packaged up, transported to the nearest docks, and loaded onto a cargo ship. The tea is then shipped halfway round the world and unloaded by another group of dockers onto lorries. From the port, the raw tea is then transported by road to a processing factory, where it’s turned into the tea bag that you drop into your mug or teapot. It’s also packed into brightly labelled boxes, made in a separate factory. The boxes are produced by printers and designers, by paper-mill workers, and by foresters who cut down the trees which supply the paper mills.

The boxes of tea bags are then transported to supermarkets and corner shops all over the UK. Without oil workers and petrochemical refinery workers you wouldn’t be sitting right now enjoying a cup of tea. The lorries themselves, and the ships too, which transport the tea across the world to your local supermarket, consist of thousands of separate components all produced in factories by workers from hundreds of different trades.

In other words, a vast network of people – from tea plantation farmers to dockers, from shipyard workers to shop assistants, from lumberjacks to oil workers – are involved in delivering that tea bag into your cup. And almost every product on sale in your local Asda or Tesco superstore involves a similarly complex process of collaboration across industries, countries and continents.

Back in the mists of history, production was much simpler. It involved individuals, or small groups of individuals, making some items and exchanging these items for other items. In today’s ultra-sophisticated economy, production is carried out socially and collectively rather than privately and individually. It involves a phenomenal amount of collaboration and co-ordination.

Yet each link in the chain of production is controlled by private individuals and run for their own self-interest and that of their shareholders. Production and distribution is carried out socially but all of the instruments of production and distribution – computer systems, transport systems, superstores, factories, offices, machines, vehicles, power stations, telephone cables – are owned by private individuals.

Without co-operation no modern society could function. But co-operation in a profit-based economy is subverted at each stage by the competing pressures and demands of rival capitalists who try to rip off each other, rip off the customer, rip off their workforces. Under capitalism we have a patchwork quilt of rival business empires each accountable only to its own shareholders, and each run purely for profit. If something can be produced for profit, it will be produced, no matter how useless, wasteful, or destructive that product is. But if something can’t be produced for profit it won’t be produced at all, no matter how desperately that product is needed.

Back in the middle of the 19th century, life expectancy in the city of Glasgow was 30 years. Deadly diseases such as cholera and typhoid rampaged through the city’s tenements, wiping out thousands at a time in epidemics.

Then, in 1859, a spectacularly ambitious and far-sighted project was launched with the aim of transporting water to Glasgow from Loch Katrine. In a remarkable feat of engineering, an elaborate network of pipes and viaducts was constructed across a 35-mile stretch of mountainous countryside. When the water began to flow through the taps, there was a miraculous improvement in sanitation and health in the most overcrowded and disease-ridden city in northern Europe.1

While all this was taking place, private enterprise was nowhere to be seen. This was a public enterprise, spearheaded by the municipal council. Its aim was not to make profits for shareholders, but to extend the lifespan of ordinary people.

The tobacco industry by contrast, shortens the life of ordinary people. It kills more people every year than are killed in wars. Five big tobacco giants alone employ over 500,000 people across the globe to manufacture billions of cigarettes. Each of these cigarettes contains at least 4000 chemicals, of which 42 have been proved to cause cancer.2

If a fraction of the resources that are dedicated to producing, advertising, and distributing cigarettes were devoted instead to research into cancer, the disease would now be history. In Britain, £150 million a year is spent in cancer research – barely one per cent of the total amount spent on tobacco. Meanwhile the tobacco companies slaughter more and more people every year. Last year three million people died from diseases caused by smoking. According to the World Health Organisation, that figure will rise to 10 million within 20 years as the tobacco corporations seek to expand their market by creating millions more nicotine addicts in the Third World.

Even more colossal than the tobacco industry is the armaments industry. In Europe and the US alone, £400 billion a year is spent on arms. In Britain, around 500,000 people are employed directly or indirectly in manufacturing weapons which will be used to kill people. The whole industry drains talent, time, energy, materials, and money.

The UK government has just signed a contract to buy 232 Eurofighter planes. Each of these planes will cost £39 million. Their total cost – £9 billion – is double the total annual spending on the NHS in Scotland.3 The companies that build these planes could easily switch to producing different products. They could manufacture kidney dialysis machines, scanners, or incubators for our hospitals. They could build hi-tech light-railway systems to relieve the congestion on our roads. They could provide electricity-powered mobile wheelchairs for everyone who needed such a vehicle. But they won’t, because there is no profitable market for these things.

The tobacco and defence industries are dramatic examples of production for destruction. The advertising industry, by contrast, does not slaughter people physically. Nor is there anything wrong, in principle, with advertising. Every organisation, whether it be a charity, a business, a political party, a campaigning body, or a government institution uses advertising in one form or another to convey information to the public. Advertising can even benefit the public, up to a point, by providing information. If you want to know which films are showing at your local cinema, you buy an evening newspaper and look at the advertisements. Some charity and campaign adverts can even be informative.

But the industry as a whole has turned into an insatiable devourer of talent and resources. There are now 200,000 people in America and 50,000 people in the UK employed in public relations. Every year, an estimated £1000 billion is spent on advertising and marketing.4

Pharmaceutical companies, for example, spend twice as much on advertising as they do on research. During the winter, these companies bombard us with adverts for cold and flu remedies. High Street chemists display a dazzling array of powders and pills, in brightly coloured packages. Each one claims to have greater magical powers than the rest. In fact, they all contain exactly the same basic ingredients. It’s easy to be misled into thinking that this bewildering assortment of rival brands represents some kind of choice. In reality, they are essentially the same products in different packets. Often, they are produced in the same factories, as are other kinds of product that appear on the supermarket shelves under different labels.

A large bakery, for example, may produce meat pies. As the pies come out of the oven they are put onto conveyor belts which enclose them in a distinctive Cellophane wrapping with the bakery’s brand name on. But then, every so often, the worker operating the conveyor belt will change the Cellophane wrapping. The same pies, made of the same ingredients, baked in the same oven, will then be sold in different wrappings, under different names, at different prices. Then each of the brands will launch expensive advertising campaigns informing us that brand X is tastier than any other brand, or brand Y is healthier, or brand Z is better for your sex life.

We are told capitalism offers variety and choice. Certainly, the range of products on sale in the average superstore can be baffling. One retail chain claims to stock 150,000 different items. But much of the choice on offer is fictitious. The variety is not in the content, but in the packaging, which is often more expensive than the product inside. It is no accident that the richest man in Britain, Hans Rausing, a billionaire four times over, made his fortune in the packaging industry.

Only on the basis of social ownership of industry, energy, transport construction and finance, would it be possible to build an integrated, harmonious, democratically planned economy. Socialism is not about reducing choice; it is about reducing waste and duplication. People living in drought-stricken regions of Africa would find it bizarre that companies in Canada produce bottled water, which they then export thousands of miles across the Atlantic to be sold in shops in rainswept Scotland, a country which needs more water as urgently as Saudi Arabia needs more sand.

In a socialist economy, run by the people for the people, there would be a shift away from global imports of low-quality and unnecessary goods towards locally produced, high-quality, low-cost products. There would be a war on waste as well as a war on poverty.

The Nazi propagandist, Josef Goebbels once made the point that with sufficient repetition it would be possible to ‘prove’ that a square is actually a circle. By endlessly repeating the claim that private ownership equals efficiency while public ownership equals incompetence, the masters of free-market propaganda have succeeded in turning a dubious assertion into an irrefutable fact.

The entire case for private ownership over social ownership hinges on a couple of flimsy pieces of evidence. The first of these is that the nationalised economies of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe failed. And the second is that the industries nationalised in the past by Old Labour were inefficient and unprofitable.

These accusations are at least partially justified, but they miss the point. Presenting the failure of bureaucratic nationalisation as proof that democratic social ownership won’t work is like reciting William McGonagall to prove that Robert Burns was a dreadful poet. Socialism is not Stalinism with a dose of democracy, nor is it capitalism with a dose of bureaucratic nationalisation.

There is an old saying, ‘two wrongs don’t make a right’. When pro-capitalist commentators crow about the failure of the Soviet Union, they should remember that two failures don’t make a success. Stalinism failed; there is no dispute about that. But capitalism and private ownership have also failed throughout most of the world. Across Asia, Africa, Latin America – where most of the world’s population actually lives – capitalism has been a catastrophic failure. It has been unable to provide even the basic necessities of life, such as food, shelter, medicine and water, to countless millions in numerous countries. In Eastern Europe, too, the restoration of private ownership has been, if anything, an even more spectacular failure than Stalinism. It has failed so badly that there is even a large and growing minority who despairingly hark back to the ‘good old days’ of Brezhnev and Kosygin.

The forms of social ownership appropriate for Scotland in the 21st century will bear no resemblance to the monolithic state-run corporations established by the Old Labour governments of the mid 20th century. These were cumbersome bureaucracies, usually run on autocratic lines by managers drafted in from the private sector. Accountants who knew nothing about the railway system were appointed to run British Rail. Bankers who knew nothing about mining were put in charge of the coal industry. Stockbrokers who knew nothing about the electricity grid were put in charge of power generation. Nothing extraordinary there, that’s exactly how these industries are run today under private ownership. One important difference, however is that for all their failings, the nationalised industries were not run purely for profit. In fact, the 1945–51 Labour government which nationalised the railways, the mines, and the power stations, instructed these industries to break even financially. This meant they were able provide better wages and conditions for their workers. It meant they were able keep prices down. It meant they were able to plough investment back into the industry. In other words, they were able do all the things that the previous private owners had failed to do.

Most of the old nationalised industries had been reduced to ruin by their former private owners, who had greedily gobbled up any profits that were made, while starving their businesses of investment. Most of these companies were on the brink of bankruptcy before they were bought over for exorbitant sums of money by the state.

The newly nationalised industries then proceeded to subsidise the rest of private industry and commerce by providing cheap materials, services, and transportation to big business. At the same time, public investment was poured into these nationalised industries to restore them to health.

Then along came Margaret Thatcher, who sold them back to the private profiteers. And here we come to a strange paradox: industries which were bought by the government for astronomically inflated prices when they were bankrupt were now sold by the government at astronomically deflated prices after they became profitable.

One of the first public assets sold off by Thatcher was British Telecom. In 1985, it was sold for a rock-bottom £4 billion. In the last five years alone, British Telecom shareholders have piled up four times that amount in profit, £16 billion. You couldn’t find a better bargain in Paddy’s Market.

Railtrack was sold off in 1996 for £1.9 billion. Within two years the value of the company on the stock exchange was over £8 billion, four and a half times the price it had been sold for in the first place. In total, 60 separate enterprises were sold off by the Tories, and the City fat cats licked their lips with delight. They bought up shares as though they were buying Lottery tickets imprinted with the words ‘Jackpot win guaranteed’.

Seven of Scotland’s ten biggest companies have made their fortunes, not by developing their own unique products, but by grabbing their slice of the privatised bus, power, and telecommunications industries. Privatisation, and its New Labour offshoots, PFI and PPP, have turned Britain into a profiteers’ paradise.

The whole privatisation rip-off was perhaps best summed up, not by any politician, but by the brilliant comic impersonator Rory Bremner. In one of his sketches, a man sits in a pub staring glumly into his pint.

> ‘What’s up?’ says his drinking companion.  
> ‘I got my car stolen last night,’ replies the man morosely. ‘And, even worse, the guy that stole it came round to my door and offered to sell it to me.’  
> ‘But that’s theft!’ says his mate.  
> ‘No,’ he replies. ‘That’s privatisation!’

In the book, A Future for Public Ownership, two Leeds University academics, Malcolm Sawyer and Kath O’Donnell, blow apart the myth that private enterprise is more dynamic and successful than public enterprise. They show, for example, that the growth rate was actually higher in public enterprises than in privately owned manufacturing industry between 1951 and 1985.

In one American study, which compared American private and public electricity companies, the researchers (Millward and Packer, 1983) concluded that ‘none of the cost studies support the proposition that public electricity firms have a lower productivity or higher unit costs than private firms.’5

A further study (Yarrow, 1986) concluded that, far from private companies being more efficient, ‘the evidence in examples such as electricity supply tends to point in the other direction, towards better performance by public firms.’6

Under capitalism, the efficiency of a company is measured by profit and share value. But there is no direct relationship between a company’s share value and its social value. Some of the most profitable companies are those which pay low wages to their workforces, rip off their customers, drive their smaller rivals to the wall, pollute the environment, and devour the natural resources of the planet. Similarly, economists judge whether a national economy is ‘efficient’ or ‘inefficient’ by totting up crude figures measuring economic growth. But these statistics never tell us what’s being produced, why it’s being produced, how it’s being produced, or whether it benefits or damages society. One country can achieve sky-high growth rates during a war by turning over the whole economy to armaments production. The people of that country may be living in hovels and surviving on bowls of rice but the economy is flourishing because the statistics say so.

Another country can achieve high growth rates because its workers toil from dawn to dusk manufacturing training shoes or motor cars which are then exported abroad because the people who make these things are too poor to buy them. But the business magazines hail this country as ‘an economic miracle’ because its growth rates seem impressive to those who are impressed by high numbers.

In neither case is there any connection between economic growth and the social health of the nation. A socially owned economy would abandon these accountants’ yardsticks and set new criteria by which to gauge the health of society and the performance of individual enterprises that operate within that society.

These criteria would be based not on what benefits shareholders, but on what benefits the public. Industry, services, transport, energy, construction would be geared towards social need rather than private greed. People would become more important than profit. Protection of the natural environment would become more important than columns of figures on a balance sheet.

To put forward such a radical vision of a different type of economy is to invite ridicule from some quarters and provoke terror in other quarters. Smug politicians will shake their heads wisely as though to say, ‘These socialists really do live in a dream world.’ Some businessmen will throw up their hands in horror at the outlandish suggestion that ordinary people could actually take over the economy and run it themselves. How could mere human beings ever replace these supermen and wonderwomen who understand business, who are able read balance sheets, who know how to order people around, who know exactly what they’re doing.

Supermen like Lord Weinstock, for example, who on the day of his retirement in early 2000 admitted in an interview with the Financial Times that he had never once set foot in any GEC factory in his 30 years as managing director of the company!
