---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Twelve - Dr Jekyll, Mr Hyde... and the SNP"
date:   2015-01-10 16:38:03
categories: book
---
DURING THE 1980S, Margaret Thatcher strutted the world stage pronouncing platitudes about the rights of small nations from Afghanistan to Kuwait, from the Baltic States to the Falkland Islands. Meanwhile, she treated with ice-cold contempt the demand from 80 per cent of Scots for some measure of Home Rule.

Since then, New Labour has conceded a modest measure of devolution to Scotland and an even more modest measure of devolution to Wales. Contrary to the mythology manufactured by the spin doctors and lazily lapped up by the media, that did not occur because Tony Blair woke up one morning with a bold vision to modernise the United Kingdom. Blair simply inherited a policy which he could not possibly jettison without delivering Scotland gift-wrapped into the grateful arms of the SNP.

From the day he took over as leader of the Labour Party, Blair was lukewarm about the idea of a Scottish Parliament. Along with his coterie of spin doctors and advisers, the New Labour leader has always privately viewed devolution as a ticking time-bomb that could blow up in the face of the UK government at some point in the future. If it were not for the inevitable political fallout, Blair would gladly have dumped devolution into the political dustbin labelled ‘outdated dogma’ alongside public ownership, trade-union rights, and opposition to privatisation.

Instead he watered down Labour’s devolution proposals to render them less dangerous. For example, under the plan drawn up by the Labour-dominated Scottish Constitutional Convention in 1995, the Scottish Parliament would have had the power ‘to take land, property and enterprises into public control and ownership’. This was deleted from New Labour’s final blueprint. The Convention’s plan for the Scottish Parliament to be responsible for all revenues raised in Scotland was also ditched and replaced by a block grant system from Westminster.

Blair’s fears have actually been proven well-founded. Instead of ‘killing off stone-dead the rump demand for separatism’, as former Scottish Labour leader George Robertson proclaimed in a fit of bravado, devolution has accelerated the momentum towards the break-up of the UK. The SNP is in a stronger position than ever before in its 66-year history.

As time goes on, the limitations of the devolved Scottish Parliament are become more and more clear to more and more people. A year after the parliament was established, an opinion poll commissioned by Scottish Television found that 78 per cent of Scots believed it had made ‘no difference at all’ to their lives. Only two per cent of those polled thought that the parliament had done a ‘a great deal of good’.

Pro-independence socialists and nationalists have argued all along that the parliament set up by New Labour was inadequate to deal with Scotland’s problems.

It has no power to increase pensions or welfare benefits. It has no power to close down the nuclear bases on the Clyde. It has no power to impose a wealth tax on the rich. It has no power to repeal the most repressive anti-trade-union laws in Europe. It has no power to increase the derisory minimum wage. It has no power to bring privatised industries and services back into the public sector. It has no power to take over ownership of North Sea oil, or land, or finance. It has no power to raise the billions of pounds needed to create a modern education system for the 21st century, or build a health service able to cope with a population that is living longer than ever before, or initiate a housing programme that will rid Scotland forever of the scourge of homeless and slum housing.

Scotland needs a proper grown-up parliament, able to take its own decisions on all the issues that matter. Instead, it has been landed with a PG-certificate parliament in which all the big decisions are taken by the grown-ups down in Westminster.

Such an arrangement is a recipe for wholesale disappointment with Holyrood. But that disillusionment won’t lead backwards towards the ultra-centralised British state that generated such bitterness under Thatcher and Major; it will lead forward to the goal of a fully independent Scotland.

For those fighting back against capitalism, the disintegration of the United Kingdom should be a cause for celebration rather than for mourning. In a keynote speech designed to bolster the Union Tony Blair gushed about the ‘qualities of British identity’. Britishness, he said, is about ‘creativity built on tolerance, openness and adaptability, work and self-improvement, strong communities and families and fair play, rights and responsibilities’.1

Most nations and states in the world today would also lay claim to these virtues. The suggestion that they are uniquely British is a breathtakingly arrogant assumption that appears to imply that Spaniards and Swedes and Belgians are intolerant, closed-minded, inflexible, lazy, unfair, and irresponsible.

The people who live on this island have no inbred monopoly on the virtues that Blair lists. Indeed, Blair’s one-sided presentation of Britain as a paragon of decency and civilised behaviour would be treated as black humour in those parts of the world which were brutally subjugated and their natural resources plundered by British imperialism. Nor is it accurate to claim that there is a single British identity. More than ever before, Britain is a fragmented multinational state, which includes within its borders a diverse multitude of national, regional, cultural, linguistic, and ethnic identities.

In itself, that is not necessarily a bad thing. In the mists of the future, there will be new multinational arrangements, including federations and confederations where resources are shared and integrated on the basis of international common ownership. The legendary Clydeside socialist, John MacLean, while calling for a Scottish Socialist Republic simultaneously offered a vision of a world without borders in which ‘intermarriage will wipe out all national differences and the world will become one’.2

But the British state is not a step towards a socialist world. It is essentially a reactionary and conservative institution, which acts as a gigantic brake on social and political progress. From the outset, Britain was an imperial state which pillaged its way across the globe. The sun may have long since set on the British Empire, and the stone-faced Victorian autocrats may have made way for smiling happy-clappy New Labourites, but the UK today remains one of the chief bulwarks of world capitalism. For the past 20 years, Britain has stood shoulder-to-shoulder with the United States in its crusade to globalise, privatise, deregulate, and generally turn the planet into the private property of the transnational corporations.

With its nuclear weapons and other military bases, its oil wealth, its landmass, and its financial institutions, Scotland is a key component part of the United Kingdom. The secession of Scotland from the Union would be a shattering defeat for British capitalism, as potent in its historic symbolism as the break-up of the Soviet Union.

But could Scotland really go it alone? Should Scotland go it alone? Could Scotland survive as an independent state? Would it become an economic wasteland, as New Labour and the Liberal Democrats claim? Or would it become a Tartan Tiger, an economic powerhouse, where economic growth would be combined with social reform to produce a society based on ‘enterprise and compassion’, as the SNP claim?

For the unionist parties, Scottish independence means Apocalypse Now. Before the Scottish parliamentary election in 1999, the Scottish Labour leader, Donald Dewar, predicted a £15 billion deficit over four years if Scotland chose independence. This would mean, according to Dewar, either cutting back public spending by a quarter or increasing the basic rate of income tax by 20 pence in the pound to plug the gap. Either way, Scotland would sink into a swamp of depression and improverishment with hundreds of thousands of jobs lost and a human tidal wave of economic refugees flooding over the border to escape mass unemployment and punitive taxation.

The SNP, naturally, disputes this analysis. They retaliate by claiming that, over the past 20 years, Scotland has subsidised the rest of the UK to the tune of £27 billion. They point out that Scotland is the seventh richest country in the world, as measured by Gross Domestic Product per head of population.

Most people scratch their heads in bewilderment when faced with these claims and counter-claims. Clearly, both sides can’t be right. Either New Labour is indulging in crude scaremongering, or the SNP is attempting to seduce the people of Scotland with false promises. So who’s right and who’s wrong?

The truth is, neither Labour nor the SNP are in a position to predict with any degree of certainly the future prospects for an independent Scotland. There’s a saying that if you laid every economist end to end, they would never reach a conclusion. Even with detailed facts and figures at their fingertips, the average economist is about as reliable as the average racing tipster. Attempting to predict the future economic health of a nation-state which does not yet exist is like trying to predict which horse will win the Derby in five years’ time.

The facts, figures, and percentages reeled off by New Labour and the SNP are designed to create the impression of scientific objectivity. But there are lies, damned lies, and statistics. For example, Donald Dewar’s forecast that an independent Scotland would run up an astronomical £15 billion deficit over four years was made at a time when oil prices were at the lowest level, in real terms, since the early 1970s. But during the following six months, there was a dramatic turnaround. By the start of 2000, oil prices and revenues had risen to their highest levels since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait sent oil prices into the stratosphere in 1990. Later in 2000, they began to fall back again.3

The Scottish economy is especially susceptible to fluctuations in the price of oil. Invariably, the unionist parties base their projections for an independent Scotland on the lowest possible oil prices, while the SNP, naturally, bases its projections upon the highest possible oil prices.

The famous £27 billion surplus claimed by the SNP mainly relates to the years between 1979 and 1985, when oil revenues were sky-high due to the high price of crude oil and the more rigorous tax regime then in operation. Since then, the position has become much more complicated. A line graph produced by the Royal Bank of Scotland charting the fluctuations in oil prices between 1983 and 2000 looks like a photo negative of the Cuillins, with high peaks, deep gorges and precipitous drops. As the bank’s oil economists point out, ‘it is not sensible to forecast oil prices’.4

Similarly, when the SNP claims that Scotland is the seventh richest country in the world, they are playing with statistics that tend to fluctuate dramatically from one month to the next. In any case, crude figures for GDP do not accurately measure overall living standards. They include profits amassed by foreign-owned companies and then shipped overseas. Scotland’s GDP includes the profits made by North Sea oil companies, which are American-, Dutch- and English-owned. These profits may be made in Scotland but they are immediately salted away into overseas bank accounts.

Many people rightly support independence because they believe that an independent Scotland would be more egalitarian, more left-wing, more socialist in outlook than ‘Cruel Britannia’. Certainly, the balance of forces in Scotland is more heavily weighted in favour of the working class than in Britain as a whole. The influence of socialism is deeper. The forces of right-wing conservatism are weaker. Social attitudes tend to be more progressive. The political centre of gravity is significantly further to the left.

Operating in such a climate, the SNP takes great care to present itself as a left-of-centre alternative to New Labour. These days, that is no difficult feat. In fact, as New Labour has evolved further and further to the right, it has been stalked in the background by the New SNP. Taking care never to actually catch up or overtake New Labour, the SNP has nonetheless shifted rightwards on a whole range of policies over the past decade.

In the 1992 general election, the SNP called for the single person’s pension to be raised to £90 a week. Any reasonable person would assume that, by 1997, pensioners would need more money to survive, given the rising cost of living. But not the SNP leadership. By 1997, the party was promising pensioners £65 a week – £25 less than five years before.

In the early 1990s, the SNP stood for the bringing back into public ownership of industries such as electricity and gas, and vehemently opposed the sell-off of the rail industry. By the end of the 1990s, companies like Railtrack and ScottishPower, which piled up vast profit mountains from the privatisation rip-off, were sponsoring the SNP conference. All references to public ownership have now been purged from party policy statements, programmes, and manifestos

Most people would also expect the SNP to be a republican party. The British monarchy is one of the most conservative and reactionary institutions in the world. It reeks of feudal patronage and privilege. A verse of the royalist national anthem, ‘God Save the Queen’ even boasts about crushing ‘rebellious Scots’. Yet the extraordinarily subservient SNP leadership never tire of reassuring the British establishment that, under their proposals, an independent Scotland will remain a monarchy with the Queen as head of state.

While insisting that they are ‘social democrats’, the SNP leadership has also repeatedly flirted with right-wing economic theories imported from America. The party has strongly hinted that it would like to reduce corporation tax on big business from 30 per cent to 12.5 per cent, even though the current level of corporation tax in the UK is already one of the lowest in Europe.

The SNP invokes the work of right-wing American economist Arthur Laffer to justify its support for handing over billions of pounds of public money to wealthy business corporations. Laffer, a guru of Reaganomics in the 1980s, argues that tax cuts, under certain conditions, can stimulate investment and production and, as a result, yield more overall tax. The SNP point to the astounding growth of the Irish economy as a model that could be emulated by an independent Scotland.

But the rise of the ‘Celtic Tiger’ took place against the background of a general upswing in the world economy, which is now reaching its limits. The Irish economy has also been fuelled by massive cash injections from the European Union, which are about to dry up. Many American and Asian transnational companies were attracted into the Irish Republic by low taxes, cheap labour, lavish government grants, and access to the European Union. Measured by bare statistics, the growth of the Irish economy has been extraordinary. But the Irish Republic continues to languish near the bottom of the European poverty league table. Now a cluster of Eastern European countries are queueing up to join the European Union, and they are able to offer even cheaper labour, even lower taxes, and even more generous subsidies.

The idea that business can be bribed to invest is one-sided and na¹^:ve. Business will only invest in any industry when it knows there are profitable markets to exploit. In the new conditions opening up across Europe, a tax-cutting policy in a capitalist independent Scotland would mean transferring billions from public services into the private bank accounts of wealthy shareholders.

Some key figures within the SNP go even further than the leadership in promoting the type of economic policies which have led to mass destitution across Latin America and other parts of the world. The party’s former environment spokesperson, George Kerevan, a former Labour councillor, advocates turning Scotland into a tartan paradise for investors. He proposes abolishing the top rate of income tax and introducing a 20 per cent flat rate across Scotland, which would mean a cleaner on £4.00 an hour paying the same rate of taxation as a company director on £400 an hour.5 It would also mean plundering billions from health, education, and other public services to finance this generous plan to make the rich richer.

Kerevan has also called on Scotland to ‘go global’, to ‘get our retaliation in first and build our own multinationals’. He complains that ‘Scotland has only half as many global companies per head as the UK, and a quarter as many as other small European nations such as Austria and Switzerland’.6

But the number of multinational, or transnational, companies operating on the world markets is not growing; it is diminishing, as they gobble each other up like corporate cannibals. In any case, how exactly would such an economic strategy benefit ordinary people within Scotland? When companies ‘go global’, they expand their operations to those parts of the world where they can find the cheapest labour and the lowest taxes.

As a general rule, the transnational corporations are becoming less and less dependent on their home countries. The Canadian-based transnational empire Seagram, which distils Chivas Regal, Glen Grant, Glen Isla, 100 Pipers, the Glenlivet and other Scotch whisky brands, conducts 97 per cent of its operation abroad with only a small core workforce based at its Montreal headquarters. The American footwear colossus Nike does not manufacture a single pair of shoes in its home country.

The entire history of the SNP is one of twists, turns, and zigzags. Like a marching regiment, the SNP rank and file are expected to fall into step with the orders of the leadership at every turn: ‘Left! Right! Left! Right!’

Today the party combines a right-wing economic policy with a left-of-centre social policy. It promises lavish tax handouts to big business. It simultaneously promises generous increases in spending on public services. Presumably, under an SNP government, Santa Claus will be appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer.

The harsh truth is that there is no room for charity or sentiment in the capitalist jungle of the 21st century. Attempting to promote left-wing social policies while pursuing right-wing economic policies is like trying to walk forward with one leg and backwards with the other. The result, for the SNP and for anyone else who attempts such a feat, will be a painful rupture.