---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Seven - Revolution In Cyberspace"
date:   2015-01-10 16:03:03
categories: book
---
THERE IS A saying in the advertising industry that ‘nothing beats repetition’. If you make the same statement over and over and over again, people will start to believe it, even if it’s a lie. So when an idea is repeated a million times a day across the world in newspapers, magazines, TV shows, radio programmes, and electronic bulletins, it eventually becomes difficult to resist.

Capitalism is enterprising. Capitalism is dynamic. Capitalism is innovative. Capitalism constantly revolutionises the way we live by inventing new products, new techniques, new designs. Without the swashbuckling risk-taking entrepreneurial buccaneers of the stock exchanges, human society would stagnate.

This argument is so familiar that it is rarely challenged. Most people, including even the staunchest defenders of the profit system, agree that capitalism does breed economic inequality and social injustice. But this is a modest price to pay for technological progress, we are assured. Without the incentive of competition and profit, we would not have cars, aeroplanes, TVs, computers, videos, fridges, microwave ovens, washing machines.

Most fiction is based on fact. Even children’s fairy tales draw upon real life experiences. The adult fairy tale that capitalism equals dynamism and progress is not without historical foundation.

Capitalism in the early days was progressive. It swept away the restrictions and restraints of feudalism, the social system that held sway across Europe for centuries before capitalism came along. Within the pyramid structure of feudalism, with kings and queens at the top and a descending hierarchy of dukes, earls, lords, knights, and peasants, everyone was slotted into their place. There was no flexibility, no social mobility, no room for innovation or individualism.

By smashing down this rigid social order, capitalism allowed people with talent, culture, and capital to break through. The wealthiest merchants and entrepreneurs began to emerge as the new ruling class in most countries, with the kings and queens and hereditary aristocrats swept aside – though in England and Scotland a compromise was reached, and the remnants of feudalism were allowed to remain in place.

The victory of the forces of capitalism over the forces of feudalism paved the way for an explosion in commerce and industry. Production of cotton, coal, iron, and a host of other commodities multiplied ten-fold. A vast network of roads, railways, and canals was constructed to transport the goods being churned out of the factories. Almost overnight, villages turned into towns and towns turned into cities. In every sphere of society – agriculture, industry, philosophy, politics, economics, religion, culture – it was a case of ‘out with the old, in with the new’. For a time, capitalism was a truly revolutionary system and succeeded in transforming society from top to bottom.

But that was then and this is now. Technological progress continues, and will continue to continue ad infinitum. But capitalism has turned into a gigantic obstacle blocking the advance of civilisation. Far from being a vehicle for human progress, the profit system, more than ever before, retards, distorts, corrupts and stifles science.

At a time when the Internet revolution is turning the world of communications upside down, such an assertion might appear heretical. A decade ago, the World Wide Web did not even exist. In 1992, there were just 100 websites. Today, there are hundreds of millions. Every day, it seems, exciting new innovations are reported. How can anyone seriously suggest that capitalism is holding back the forward march of history?

But even under feudalism, decisive technological advances took place. The first Information Revolution took place in the 15th century, with the invention of printing. This took place not because of feudalism, but despite feudalism. Indeed, the printed word was to become a revolutionary instrument in the hands of those fighting to overthrow feudalism. In France, for example, the publishing industry had exploded in the decades before the French Revolution in 1789. Over the previous century, the male literacy rate had doubled to 50 per cent and the female rate to 25 per cent. There was a proliferation of books and periodicals and by the 1790s it was estimated that one in four French adults were reading the revolutionary press.1

The Internet was not invented by businessmen and accountants. Nor, contrary to popular mythology, was it the brainchild of the US military. The US Defence Department only began to fund further research after they discovered that this was a communications network capable of surviving a nuclear war. But the network was actually developed in the first place by university-based computer scientists working, not in competition, but in collaboration with one another. It was not devised to make money; it was designed as a means of sharing information and knowledge.

The private sector only started to sit up and take notice in the mid-1990s after the technology, the software, and the protocol system had already been thoroughly developed. According to Professor Douglas Rushkoff, a New York-based expert on communications technology, there has not been a single genuine innovation since big business took over.2

Recently an in-house variation on the light-bulb riddle has been circulating among Microsoft employees. The question: how many Microsoft technicians does it take to change a light bulb? The answer: four. One to take the old one out. A second to rewire the socket so that only light bulbs produced by Microsoft will fit. A third to make sure that when the switch is flicked on, nothing happens. And a fourth to convince the government that Microsoft doesn’t have a monopoly over the socket.

Every innovation by Microsoft and other software and hardware companies is designed for one purpose – to make more money. So what’s the problem with that? Surely, if they are all competing with one another, they’ll provide better faster cheaper easier-to-use computers, programs, and operating systems? In theory, that’s what should happen, because that’s what the free-market textbooks say should happen. But in the real world of cut-throat, greed-driven commerce, that’s exactly what doesn’t happen.

Instead software writers employed by computer manufacturers write programs that are designed to work only on the newest, fastest, most powerful computers. The aim is not to provide better software, but to force people to keep buying newer, faster, and more powerful computers to keep up. It’s like buying a new brand of soap powder that washes your clothes cleaner, brighter, and whiter than any other soap powder. The only problem is, it won’t work in your old washing machine, so you have to buy a new one.

New versions of programs are deliberately designed to be incompatible with the older versions of the same program. This causes communications problems and it forces consumers into an endless cycle of upgrades. But it makes money for big business, which is what capitalism is all about.

It is through co-operation rather than competition that the Internet was able to develop. All of the key advances – Eudora, Usenet, the web browser, chat rooms – were designed in universities rather than in the research laboratories of private companies. Nor were these advances in information sold for profit. Instead, they were distributed free as ‘shareware’ – programs that anyone can download free of charge. Now a new operating system Linux, which is hailed by experts as by far superior to anything ever developed by Microsoft or Apple Mac, has arrived. It was designed by a student, who distributes the system free of charge to anyone who wants it.

We are repeatedly told that, without the profit motive, society would stagnate. Humans have an inborn desire to become richer than everyone else. This striving for wealth drives people to scale the heights of human knowledge and endeavour. And that’s why we no longer live in caves cooking over open fires.

This is not just a fringe theory, like faith in reincarnation or yogic flying. This is the universally accepted, mainstream explanation of historical progress. It is the philosophy that underpins the entire economic and political system we live under. Yet, as a theory, it’s as watertight as Rab C Nesbitt’s string vest.

No significant scientific, medical, or cultural breakthrough in history has ever been inspired by greed. In general, the driving force of progress has been the natural human impulse to expand the horizons of human knowledge.

One of the world’s greatest-ever inventors was Thomas Edison, who combined theoretical science with practical engineering. Edison established the Edison Electric Light Company, which later became General Electric, today one of the largest and most powerful transnational corporations on the planet. But Edison was interested in making things, not money. He recruited 20 of the top scientific brains in America, including mathematicians, physicists, engineers, chemists, and clockmakers to his institute, which was, in essence, the first-ever industrial laboratory. He and his colleagues invented, designed, and manufactured a whole array of products, including the first electric light bulb, the first electric train, and the first phonograph. They opened the door to the age of electricity and began to develop the rudiments of electronics, paving the way for radio, TV, and computers. But profit was not part of the calculation of these brilliant scientists. Edison himself denounced wealth and lived a modest and frugal lifestyle.3

Albert Einstein was the most brilliant scientist of the 20th century. Like Edison, he had no interest in riches. Early in his career, he decided to live a Spartan lifestyle. He reduced his personal requirements to the bare essentials – clothing, plain food, a modest house, no extravagant luxuries. His reasoning was that the pursuit of money and material comforts could distract him from his mission to push forward the frontiers of scientific knowledge. Einstein even wrote a pamphlet opposing capitalism, Why Socialism?4

John Logie Baird, living in poverty in an attic room, created the prototype television using makeshift materials such as a biscuit tin and cheap cycle lamps held together by darning needles and pieces of string. Louis Pasteur, Alexander Fleming, Alexander Graham Bell, and the other great innovators were similarly single-minded in their pursuit of knowledge and understanding.

One of the most hyped scientific breakthroughs of recent times has been the deciphering of the human genetic code. Genetic scientists estimate that up to 4000 hereditary diseases could eventually be eradicated or cured as a result of this breakthrough.

Yet no scientific advance illuminates more clearly the irreconcilable conflict between private greed and human progress. From 1990 onwards, the Human Genome Project in America and the Sanger Centre in Britain, both funded from charities and taxes, worked flat out to crack the so-called ‘code of life’. Only after eight years of groundwork had been laid by public-sector scientists and researchers did the profiteers muscle in, scenting the possibility of piling up vast fortunes by patenting genetic information.

Here we have two diametrically opposed value systems. On the one side are the get-rich-quick merchants, whose aim is to make money. On the other side are dedicated scientists, who want to deepen understanding of the human make-up in order to assist the fight against cancer, diabetes, and AIDS.

The private profiteers hoard knowledge like dogs guarding their bones. If their capitalist value systems were to prevail in the field of genetic research, big business would control human evolution itself. Investigating remedies for baldness and wrinkles would become 1000 times more important than research into Third World diseases because they would be potentially 1000 times more profitable. Health services everywhere would be under the thumb of the venture capitalists.

But while the corporate mercenaries strike at the heart of scientific advance by treating information as a commodity to be bought and sold for profit, most of the world’s great scientists operate by a different moral code. The Sanger Centre – which for a decade has spearheaded research into the genetic code – publishes all data free of charge on the Internet. Its director, Dr John Sulston, an avowed socialist, has no time for those who seek to profit from science. ‘I don’t want my genetic information to be under the control of any one entity or corporation,’ he told New Scientist magazine.5

Similarly, most of the world’s great writers, artists, and composers have been motivated by art rather than money. The life of Beethoven, for example, was one long struggle with poverty and debt. Instead of making himself rich by composing pretty tunes for the nobility, he composed music which was denounced as subversive by the reactionary rulers of his native Vienna. ‘Words are in chains, but they can never silence my music,’ the composer declared in defiance of the despots.

As a rule, it is whenever great artists sell out their talents to concentrate on making money that the standard of their art, literature, or music diminishes. But under capitalism, most gifted people come under pressure from the start to sell their talents to the highest bidder, invariably a big-business empire.

How many of the world’s greatest scientists today are employed in the armaments industry, applying their genius to the grisly task of devising ever more murderous instruments of death and destruction? The American government spends $370 billion every year on defence, even though the US has never been invaded in its history. It spends 0.75 per cent of that figure – $2.5 billion – on research into cancer.6

The architect of the NHS, Nye Bevan, once said, ‘Socialism is the language of priorities.’ Under a socialist economic system, today’s priorities would be turned upside down and inside out. Instead of devising laser-guided bombs that can be guided around street corners hundreds of miles distant, scientists and technicians could be employed to discover the causes of cancer and other deadly diseases, or to develop new forms of energy which do not harm the planet, or to devise ways of controlling the climate to prevent floods, droughts, and hurricanes, or to develop space travel and the exploration of the universe.

In the meantime, the advance of technology, warped and distorted though it has been up till now, is a deadly threat to the stability of capitalism.

According to the old adage, ‘information is power’. In every society that has existed up till now, information has been under the control of a powerful elite. Everyone can buy a newspaper to find out what’s happening in the world, or switch on the radio or TV news. But, as a general rule, the media are either under the control of rich businessmen or under the thumb of state governments. In theory, anyone can launch their own newspaper. There do exist today a few newspapers which do provide an alternative anti-Establishment slant. But these are run on a shoestring and cannot hope to compete with with the big-business-owned press.

Only the seriously rich possess the capital to produce a high-quality daily newspaper which requires printing presses, sophisticated equipment, and a small army of journalists, layout artists, photographers, accountants, receptionists, cashiers, van drivers, and other employees. It also requires access to the distribution network, which is controlled by a few big companies such as John Menzies in Scotland. In addition, newspapers and magazines are reliant on advertising revenues, which in turn shapes the content and political slant of the publication.

The Internet, by contrast, is open to everyone. Big business sees the Internet as a saviour. It is a means of by-passing national governments and avoiding restrictions on business imposed by national governments. Its vision of the Internet is of a vast singing, dancing marketplace, a global advertising bazaar geared solely towards commerce. But the reality is radically different. If you key the word ‘Nike’ or ‘McDonald’ into a search engine, it will call up the company’s official websites. But it will also call up a host of other unofficial sites which provide the type of counter-information that the giant corporations would rather keep secret.

Usenet, the international network of mailing lists and newsgroups, has become the 21st-century version of the Roman Open Forum, where theories, ideologies, polemics, and masses of information are exchanged 24 hours a day.

The Internet has become the first international bastion of free speech and free thought. It is transforming the balance of forces between the powerful and the powerless. Without the Internet, the Mexican government would long ago have militarily crushed the Zapatistas. But this guerrilla movement, based deep in the jungles of Chiapas, has utilised the Internet to build around it a worldwide supporting cast of millions.

Ian Pearson, who is employed by BT as a ‘futurologist’, makes the point, ‘Imagine re-running the feminist or environmental battles of the past few decades in an age when 98 per cent of the population are connected to the Internet. The economic muscle of the movement could be mobilised instantly and co-ordinated perfectly to much more rapid effect.’7

No sooner were these words written at the end of 1999 than they were spectacularly corroborated in the form of giant protests in Seattle and Washington against global capitalism. These protests were organised essentially via the World Wide Web. At the Washington demo, there was even a ‘protest cam’ that allowed people all over the world to view the events in real time on the Internet.

Interestingly, Pearson, in Our View of the Future, a series of documents published by BT to celebrate the new millennium, warns that capitalism cannot survive the advance of technology. ‘The traditional capitalist system has worked very well to increase local, national, and global wealth for many years. However, it may have peaked already and, if not, the peak may arrive soon.’8

National governments are terrified by the disruptive potential of this free flow of information over cyberspace. But the horse has already bolted. It is true that governments can close down websites that they do not like. But human ingenuity has devised so many ways around cyber-censorship that it has become impossible to suppress information, short of closing down the entire telecommunications network.

Just as the printing revolution hastened the fall of feudalism by opening up a world of new ideas, so this new information revolution is likely to accelerate the drive to replace global capitalism with global socialism. Information has always been jealously guarded by the privileged elite who control society. But knowledge is rapidly being democratised by technology.

The advance of technology undermines two of the key arguments that have traditionally been deployed against socialism. The first of these is that socialism will lead to totalitarianism. This fear is one of the poisonous legacies of Stalinism. As we argue in more depth elsewhere in this book, totalitarianism was a product of conditions that do not apply in Scotland or anywhere else in Western Europe in the 21st century. Moreover, as Tony Benn once pointed out, blaming Karl Marx for the crimes of Stalinism is like blaming Jesus Christ for the Spanish Inquisition.

Nonetheless, the rise of communications technology should lay to rest any lingering fear that ‘things could go wrong’, that we could defeat capitalism only to have some tinpot dictator step in and take over. An essential precondition for totalitarianism is mass ignorance. Every totalitarian state in history has relied upon thought control. Only when people are kept in the dark can they be controlled.

Far from turning into an Orwellian nightmare, the triumph of hi-tech socialism could usher in the most democratic political system ever known. Instead of an elite group of middle-class politicians taking all the key political decisions, and another group of mega-rich businessmen taking all the key economic decisions, a genuine participatory democracy could be built.

At local, regional, national, and eventually international level, electronic voting, electronic consultation, and electronic referenda could bring about the most sweeping, democratic revolution in the history of the world. The fusion of a new egalitarian sociology with cutting-edge technology could allow direct democracy to flourish for the first time since ancient tribal society.