---
layout: post
title:  "Notes"
date:   2015-01-10 17:01:03
categories: references
---

## Chapter 1

1. <a name='chapter-1-1' />Daily Record; December 31, 1999.
2. <a name='chapter-1-2' />Scotland Against Drugs press release, December 29, 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-1-3' />Statistics compiled from 1999-2000 annual reports from Scotland’s major banks and insurance companies.
4. <a name='chapter-1-4' /> G. Stent, The Coming of the Golden Age: A View of the End of Progress, New York: Natural History Press, 1969.
5. <a name='chapter-1-5' /> Address to World Bank annual meeting, 1973. Quoted in ‘Millennium Lottery’, a report published by Christian Aid in 1999.
6. <a name='chapter-1-6' /> World Bank Report on development indicators, April 2000.
7. <a name='chapter-1-7' /> Human Development Report 2000, UN Development Programme, June 2000.
8. <a name='chapter-1-8' /> The figure of £750 billion was widely quoted in the business press at the time of the Asian financial crisis. If anything, it is an underestimate of the current volume of financial trading on the world’s stock exchanges.
9. <a name='chapter-1-9' /> Statistic quoted by Jean-Francois Richard, Vice President for Europe of the World Bank, in ‘Judgement Day for Our Brave New World’, Scotland on Sunday, June 23, 2000.
10. <a name='chapter-1-10' /> George Kerevan column, The Scotsman, May 10, 1999.
11. <a name='chapter-1-11' /> Malnutrition Advisory Group report, January 7, 2000.
12. <a name='chapter-1-12' /> Report by Director of Development and Regeneration Services, Glasgow City Council referring to school year 1998–99 (undated).
13. <a name='chapter-1-13' /> New Internationalist magazine, March 1999.
14. <a name='chapter-1-14' /> Royal Society of Medicine conference on depressive illness, November 3, 1999.
15. <a name='chapter-1-15' /> For a full discussion see Joseph Rowntree Foundation report, December 9, 1999. See also, Susan Flockhart, ‘Dear Sick Place’, Sunday Herald, February 7, 1999 and Ian Bell, ‘What Has Labour – Old or New – Done for Glasgow?’, The Scotsman, December 17, 1999.
16. <a name='chapter-1-16' /> Quoted in Brian Lewis, ‘Poverty City’, Scottish Socialist Voice, issue 1, vol. 2, October 23, 1998.

## Chapter 2

1. <a name='chapter-2-1' /> Sunday Times’ Rich List 2000, Sunday Times, March 19, 2000.
2. <a name='chapter-2-2' /> D. Peters et al; Health Expenditure, Services and Outcomes in Africa 1990-96: World Bank; 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-2-3' /> Newsnight, October 17, 1999.
4. <a name='chapter-2-4' /> Speeches to CBI conferences, November 1999 (Byers) and November 1995 (Blair).
5. <a name='chapter-2-5' /> Although there is no officially recognised poverty line in the UK, charities such as the Child Poverty Action Group set their own definition of poverty, usually based on 50 per cent of average earnings after housing costs. The latest figures available were published in October 1999 and show one in four of the UK population – 14 million people – living in poverty. This compares with one in ten of the population – 5 million people – in 1979. From Child Poverty Action Group information document, ‘Poverty Facts and Figures’: CPAG 2000.
6. <a name='chapter-2-6' /> Nigeria GDP figure from CIA ‘World Factbook’, 1999.
7. <a name='chapter-2-7' /> Sunday Times’ Rich List 2000, ‘Scotland’s Richest 100’.
8. <a name='chapter-2-8' /> Ibid.
9. <a name='chapter-2-9' /> Survey conducted for Prospect magazine by Centre for Economics and Business Research Ltd; October, 1995.

## Chapter 3

1. <a name='chapter-3-1' /> P. Murray, ‘National Health Scandal’, Scottish Socialist Voice, issue 22, vol. 2, January 21, 2000.
2. <a name='chapter-3-2' /> Chicago Tribune, September 6, 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-3-3' /> Report from chief economist at Merrill Lynch, Washington Post, August 7, 1997. Quoted in Stephen Haseler, The Super-Rich: The Unjust New World of Global Capitalism, Basingstoke: Macmillan Press, 2000.
4. <a name='chapter-3-4' /> R. Lawrence, Single World, Divided Nations? International Trade and OECD Labour Markets, Paris: Brookings/OECD, 1996.
5. <a name='chapter-3-5' /> J. Rifkin, The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-Market Era, New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 1995.
6. <a name='chapter-3-6' /> See Ian Angell, The New Barbarian Manifesto (How to Survive the Information Age), London: Kogan Page, 2000. See also LSE magazine, Summer 1995 and ‘The Smiling Prophet of Social Doom’, Scotland on Sunday, December 31, 1995.
7. <a name='chapter-3-7' /> See Alan McCombes, ‘Scotland Needs Socialism’, Scottish Socialist Voice, issue 1, November 22, 1996.
8. <a name='chapter-3-8' /> See ‘The Price of Success: Beyond the Great Worklife Debate’, a report compiled by Ceridian Performance Partners and Management Today, 1999.

## Chapter 4

1. <a name='chapter-4-1' /> See J. Reid, ‘John Buchan and the Legacy of Racism’, The Herald, January 4, 1996. (Reprinted in J. Reid, Power Without Principles: New Labour’s Sickness and Other Essays, Edinburgh: B&W, 1999).
2. <a name='chapter-4-2' /> T. Gallagher, Glasgow The Uneasy Peace: Religious Tension in Modern Scotland, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1987.
3. <a name='chapter-4-3' /> Statistics from CWI (Committee for a Workers International) statement to commemorate International Women’s Day, March 2000.
4. <a name='chapter-4-4' /> F. Engels, Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State, 1886.
5. <a name='chapter-4-5' /> J. MacLeod, Highlanders: A History of the Gaels, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1996
6. <a name='chapter-4-6' /> Information supplied by Campaign Against Domestic Violence.
7. <a name='chapter-4-7' /> Information supplied by Gingerbread and One Plus.

## Chapter 5

1. <a name='chapter-5-1' /> See ‘Benefits Butcher’, Scottish Socialist Voice, issue 6, vol. 2, February 12, 1999.
2. <a name='chapter-5-2' /> T. O’Boyle, At Any Cost: Jack Welch, General Electric and the Pursuit of Profit, New York: Knopf, 1998.
3. <a name='chapter-5-3' /> The Scotsman business section, February 16, 2000.
4. <a name='chapter-5-4' /> The Scotsman Business 300, March 1996.
5. <a name='chapter-5-5' /> Fair Trade Yearbook 1994; New Internationalist, August 1998; New Internationalist, September 1995; New Internationalist, October 1999.
6. <a name='chapter-5-6' /> John Lloyd column, Scotland on Sunday, January 23, 2000.
7. <a name='chapter-5-7' /> The Times, September 17, 1999.
8. <a name='chapter-5-8' /> Tony Blair, Prime Minister’s Question Time, April 5, 2000.
9. <a name='chapter-5-9' /> J. Gray, False Dawn: Delusions of Global Capitalism, London: Granta, 1999.
10. <a name='chapter-5-10' /> Ibid.
11. <a name='chapter-5-11' /> I. McWhirter, ‘Labour Rushes In Where Thatcher Feared to Tread’, Sunday Herald, November 14, 1999.
12. <a name='chapter-5-12' /> Gray, False Dawn

## Chapter 6

1. <a name='chapter-6-1' /> M. Friedman, New York Times, September 13, 1970. Quoted in J. McMurtry, The Cancer Stage of Capitalism, London: Pluto, 1999.
2. <a name='chapter-6-2' /> Ibid.
3. <a name='chapter-6-3' /> C. Wolmar, Stagecoach: A Classic Rags to Riches Tale from the Frontiers of Capitalism, London: Orion, 1998.
4. <a name='chapter-6-4' /> Business Week, July 18,1997.
5. <a name='chapter-6-5' /> Ibid.
6. <a name='chapter-6-6' /> G. Soros, The Crisis of Global Capitalism, New York: Public Affairs, 1999.
7. <a name='chapter-6-7' /> J. Seabrook, ‘Hands Without Bodies’, New Internationalist, July 1996.
8. <a name='chapter-6-8' /> P. McGill, Children of the Dead End, London: Caliban, 1982 (first published 1914).
9. <a name='chapter-6-9' /> The Hollow State, BBC2, 1996.
10. <a name='chapter-6-10' /> B. Brookes and P. Madden, The Globetrotting Sports Shoe, Christian Aid, 1995. Also for more recent information, see the Nikewatch website at www.caa.org.au/campaigns/nike.
11. <a name='chapter-6-11' /> N. Rufford, ‘Prisons to Offer Telesales Jobs’, The Times, August 10, 1997. According to this article, Tony Blair was considering implementing a similar scheme in British prisons.
12. <a name='chapter-6-12' /> J. Gray, False Dawn: Delusions of Global Capitalism, London: Granta, 1998.
13. <a name='chapter-6-13' /> Sir Donald MacKay, ‘Nothing Must Stand in the Way of Free Trade’s Global March’, Scotland on Sunday, December 26, 1999.
14. <a name='chapter-6-14' /> M.J. Mandel, ‘The Risk that Boom Will Turn to Bust’, American Business Week, February 14, 2000.

## Chapter 7

1. <a name='chapter-7-1' /> See website, Who Owns What: The Database of Media Ownership (General Electric Corporation Overview) at www.mediaownership.org/ge
2. <a name='chapter-7-2' /> Inland Revenue Statistics 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-7-3' /> J. Paxman, Friends in High Places, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991.
4. <a name='chapter-7-4' /> See T. Benn, The Benn Diaries 1940-1990, London: Hutchison, 1995.
5. <a name='chapter-7-5' /> P. Taaffe, T. Grant and L. Walsh, ‘The State: A Warning to the Labour Movement’, Militant Pamphlet, 1983.

## Chapter 8

1. <a name='chapter-8-1' /> E.J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution: Europe 1789-1848, London: Cardinal, 1973.
2. <a name='chapter-8-2' /> See Douglas Rushkoff, ‘Breaking the Tech Myths (Before they Break Us)’, November 1998; and ‘The Shareware Universe’ (undated), www.rushkoff.com
3. <a name='chapter-8-3' /> T. O’Boyle, At Any Cost: Jack Welch, General Electric and the Pursuit of Profit, New York: Knopf, 1998.
4. <a name='chapter-8-4' /> A. Einstein, ‘Why Socialism?’ was published in the Monthly Review, New York, May 1949.
5. <a name='chapter-8-5' /> New Scientist, June 30, 2000.
6. <a name='chapter-8-6' /> Figures provided by US-based cancer research charities.
7. <a name='chapter-8-7' /> I. Pearson, ‘Our View of the Future (The Future of Capitalism)’, British Telecommunications plc, 2000. This can be downloaded from the following web address: www.bt.com/innovation/viewpoints/pearson/capitalism.htm
8. <a name='chapter-8-8' /> Ibid.

## Chapter 9

1. <a name='chapter-9-1' /> J. McMurtry, The Cancer Stage of Capitalism, London: Pluto Press, 1999.
2. <a name='chapter-9-2' /> Statistics provided by the Hadley Centre, linked to the UK Met Office.
3. <a name='chapter-9-3' /> See ‘Climate Change and its Impacts’ (Kyoto, 1997; Buenos Aires, 1998; Bonn, 1999), Hadley Centre.
4. <a name='chapter-9-4' /> The Ecologist, March/April 1999.
5. <a name='chapter-9-5' /> L. McDonald and A. Myers, ‘Malign Design’, New Internationalist, November 1998.
6. <a name='chapter-9-6' /> S. George, The Lugano Report, London: Pluto Press, 1999.
7. <a name='chapter-9-7' /> S. George, How the Other Half Dies, London: Pluto Press, 1986.
8. <a name='chapter-9-8' /> McDonald and Myers, ‘Malign Design’, New Internationalist, November 1998.
9. <a name='chapter-9-9' /> I. Bell, ‘Are Our Farmers Doomed?’, The Scotsman, September 15, 1999.

## Chapter 10

1. <a name='chapter-10-1' /> A. Wightman, Who Owns Scotland, Edinburgh: Canongate, 1996.
2. <a name='chapter-10-2' /> T. Johnston, Our Scots Noble Families, Glendaruel: Argyll Publishing, 1999 (New Edition).
3. <a name='chapter-10-3' /> Wightman, Who Owns Scotland.
4. <a name='chapter-10-4' /> A. Cramb, Who Owns Scotland Now?, Edinburgh: Mainstream, 1996.
5. <a name='chapter-10-5' /> Jan van de Ploeg appeared on the programme on October 19, 1995. Quoted in Wightman, Who Owns Scotland.
6. <a name='chapter-10-6' /> Royal Bank of Scotland Monthly Oil and Gas Index.
7. <a name='chapter-10-7' /> C. Woolfson, J. Foster and M. Beck, Paying for the Piper; Capital and Labour in Britain’s Offshore Oil Industry, London: Marshall, 1996.
8. <a name='chapter-10-8' /> Quoted on Wasted Windfall, Channel 4, September 18, 1994.
9. <a name='chapter-10-9' /> G. Brown, ed., The Red Paper on Scotland, EUSPB, 1975.
10. <a name='chapter-10-10' /> Petroleum Economist, August 1998.

## Chapter 11

1. <a name='chapter-11-1' /> Glasgow Corporation Water Works archives, Glasgow University Library.
2. <a name='chapter-11-2' /> J. McMurtry, The Cancer Stage of Capitalism, London: Pluto, 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-11-3' /> Scotland on Sunday business section, February 13, 2000.
4. <a name='chapter-11-4' /> McMurtry, The Cancer Stage of Capitalism.
5. <a name='chapter-11-5' /> M. Sawyer and K. O’Donnell, A Future for Public Ownership, London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1999.
6. <a name='chapter-11-6' /> Ibid.

## Chapter 12

1. <a name='chapter-12-1' /> Speech to Labour Party Conference, 1996.
2. <a name='chapter-12-2' /> From H. McDiarmid, ‘A Drunk Man Looks At The Thistle’, 1926.
3. <a name='chapter-12-3' /> Labour General Election Manifesto, February 1974.
4. <a name='chapter-12-4' /> W. Hutton, ‘Greed is Good, Too Good to be True’, Observer, January 30, 2000.
5. <a name='chapter-12-5' /> J. Gray, False Dawn: Delusions of Global Capitalism, London: Granta, 1998.
6. <a name='chapter-12-6' /> Observer, September 29, 1996.

## Chapter 13

1. <a name='chapter-13-1' /> From Tony Blair’s keynote speech, March 28, 2000.
2. <a name='chapter-13-2' /> John MacLean, (Scottish Workers Republican Party candidate, Gorbals constituency), Election Address, 1922.
3. <a name='chapter-13-3' /> See Royal Bank of Scotland Monthly Oil and Gas Index.
4. <a name='chapter-13-4' /> Royal Bank of Scotland Economics Office Report, March 20, 2000.
5. <a name='chapter-13-5' /> George Kerevan, The Scotsman, August 16, 1999.
6. <a name='chapter-13-6' /> George Kerevan, The Scotsman, June 24, 1999.

## Chapter 14

1. <a name='chapter-14-1' /> B. Brecht, The Solution, 1953.
2. <a name='chapter-14-2' /> Quoted in John MacLean, Nan Milton, London: Pluto Press, 1973.
3. <a name='chapter-14-3' /> For more information about the economic achievements of the USSR, see Roger Silverman and Ted Grant, Bureaucratism, or, Workers Power, Militant, 1975.
4. <a name='chapter-14-4' /> See Forbes magazine articles on Russia, September 7, 1998; November 16, 1998; March 22, 1999.
5. <a name='chapter-14-5' /> Revolution Betrayed by Leon Trotsky was first published in 1936. It is now out of print, though it is worthwhile trying to get a second-hand copy of this seminal analysis of totalitarianism in the Soviet Union.

## Chapter 15

1. <a name='chapter-15-1' /> T. Bunyan, The Poltical Police in Britain, London: Quartet Books, 1983 (first published in 1975).
2. <a name='chapter-15-2' /> See E. Truman, ‘Hacked Off’, Scottish Socialist Voice, issue 16, vol. 2, September 30, 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-15-3' /> S. Milne, The Enemy Within, London: Verso, 1994.
4. <a name='chapter-15-4' /> I. Roxburgh, P. O’Brien and J. Roddick, Chile: The State and Revolution, London: Macmillan Press, 1977.
5. <a name='chapter-15-5' /> Quoted in Milne, The Enemy Within.
6. <a name='chapter-15-6' /> The Zapatista website is at www.ezln.org

## Chapter 16

1. <a name='chapter-16-1' /> Quoted in T. Sheridan and A. McCombes, ‘Struggle, Solidarity and Socialism’, Scottish Militant Labour pamphlet, 1994.
2. <a name='chapter-16-2' /> Inland Revenue Statistics 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-16-3' /> The findings were published in The Scotsman in November 1998.
4. <a name='chapter-16-4' /> A. Neil, ‘Walking With Ideological Dinosaurs’, The Scotsman, November 12, 1999.

## Chapter 17

1. <a name='chapter-17-1' /> ‘British Social Attitudes Survey 1999’, conducted by National Council for Social Research.
2. <a name='chapter-17-2' /> See G. Orwell, Homage to Catalonia, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989 (First published 1938); H. Thomas, The Spanish Civil War, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977; Sam Dolgoff, ed., The Anarchist Collectives: Workers’ Self-Management in the Spanish Revolution 1936-39, Free Life Editions, 1974.
3. <a name='chapter-17-3' /> See C. Doyle, Month of Revolution: France 1968, Fortress Books, 1988. See also reports in Sunday Times by Patrick Searle and Maureen McConville, May 1968.
4. <a name='chapter-17-4' /> J. Foster and C. Woolfson, Politics of the UCS Work-In: Class Alliances and the Right to Work, London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1986.
5. <a name='chapter-17-5' /> C. Woolfson and J. Foster, Track Record: The Story of the Caterpillar Occupation, London: Verso, 1988.

## Chapter 18

1. <a name='chapter-18-1' /> W. Ferguson, Scotland’s Relations with England: A Survey to 1707, Edinburgh: The Saltire Society, 1994.
2. <a name='chapter-18-2' /> The poem ‘Sic’ a Parcel of Rogues in a Nation’ is by Robert Burns.
3. <a name='chapter-18-3' /> A. Gray, Why Scots Should Rule Scotland, Edinburgh: Canongate, 1997.
4. <a name='chapter-18-4' /> P. Berresford Ellis and S. McA’Ghobhainn, The Scottish Insurrection of 1820, London: Gollancz; 1970.
5. <a name='chapter-18-5' /> N. Milton, John MacLean, London: Pluto, 1973.
6. <a name='chapter-18-6' /> A. Marr, The Battle for Scotland, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1992.
7. <a name='chapter-18-7' /> J. Cannon, ‘From Karl Marx to the Fourth of July’, The Militant, reprinted in Notebook of an Agitator, New York: Pathfinder Press, 1973.

## Chapter 19

1. <a name='chapter-19-1' /> These figures derive from calculations based on statistics from The World Factbook 1999, Central Intelligence Agency, United States, and from J. Peat and S. Boyle, An Illustrated Guide to the Scottish Economy, London: Duckworth, 1999.
2. <a name='chapter-19-2' /> S. Flockhart, ‘Dear Sick Place’, Sunday Herald, February 7, 1999.
3. <a name='chapter-19-3' /> M. Sawyer and K. O’Donnell, A Future for Public Ownership, London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1999.
4. <a name='chapter-19-4' /> See Scottish Socialist Party conference document, ‘The Scottish Economy: Scotland’s Economic Gulf’. The figure was calculated by dividing the combined profits made by overseas companies in Scotland by the number of Scottish employees on their payroll.
5. <a name='chapter-19-5' /> Peat and Boyle, ‘An Illustrated Guide to the Scottish Economy’; company annual reports 1998-99.

## Chapter 20
1. <a name='chapter-20-1' /> See I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed: Trotsky 1921-1929 (vol. 2 of a 3 vol. biography of Leon Trotsky), Chapter III, ‘Not By Politics Alone’, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959.

## Chapter 21
1. <a name='chapter-21-1' /> L. Grassic Gibbon, A Scots Quair, vol. 2, Cloud Howe, Edinburgh: Lomond, 1986.
2. <a name='chapter-21-2' /> F. Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man, Free Press, 1992.
3. <a name='chapter-21-3' /> The ‘What Women Want: Values and Visions’ survey was conducted throughout 1995 by the Women’s Communication Centre.
