---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Fourteen - All The King's Men"
date:   2015-01-10 16:46:03
categories: book
---
BACK IN THE early part of last century, Scotland’s street-corner socialist agitators would start an open-air meeting by asking everyone present to check the feet of the person beside them. Anyone wearing shiny polished boots with distinctive markings could be safely assumed to be a police spy. They would be politely asked to remove themselves from the vicinity so that the meeting could proceed.

These days, the covert operations conducted by the forces of the state against so-called ‘subversion’ are a million times more sophisticated. In his book, The Political Police in Britain, published in 1975, Tony Bunyan explained how the names of three million people – more than one in 20 of the population – were filed on a card-index system locked away in the headquarters of shadowy organisations such as Special Branch and MI5. He revealed how the intelligence services would tap telephones, open mail, photograph demonstrators, monitor the left-wing press, photocopy petitions, infiltrate trade unions and political parties, bug their headquarters, and send agent provocateurs to demonstrations.1

That was a quarter of a century ago. In the hi-tech 21st century, techniques such as steaming open envelopes and burgling houses to plant listening devices in telephones appear as quaintly dated as the early James Bond films. Nowadays, the state has the capacity to monitor tens of thousands of phone calls simultaneously. For the past ten years, every single phone call, fax, and email sent between Britain and Ireland has been intercepted and sent to the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) for analysis.

A vast array of information is collated from a variety of resources, including phone calls logged by British Telecom, bank account details, credit-card transactions, housing information, vehicle particulars, social-security records, newspapers, the Internet, undercover agents, and paid informants. This, in turn, is used to build up an intricate picture of the lifestyle, habits, and appearance of millions of individuals, right down to their accents and even their shoe sizes.

The people who conduct these operations are unelected by anyone, and unaccountable to the general public. They are operate under conditions of total secrecy in a clandestine sub-world which is beyond the control even of elected politicians.

The Internet represents an extraordinary breakthrough in communications, allowing a free flow of information and ideas at a speed that would have seemed incomprehensible a few decades ago. But the dark side of the Internet is its potential to provide the framework for the most comprehensive surveillance system ever devised. For example, the British government’s RIP Bill will force Internet Service Providers to track every piece of data passing through their computers and route this information to the so-called Government Technical Assistance Centre, an innocent-sounding organisation which is actually a front for MI5.

The government even plans to force people to surrender encryption codes. Encryption is the deliberate scrambling of a file to make it unreadable except by those who know the code. It is the cyber equivalent of a front-door key, or a locker key.2

Imagine the police were given powers – without obtaining a warrant or any other form of permission – to force you to hand over your keys to allow them to rifle through your possessions whenever they feel like it. Imagine that the penalty for refusing to hand the keys over was two years in jail. And if that’s not sufficiently hair-raising, try to picture a law which left you liable to five years’ imprisonment simply for letting someone else know that the police have obtained a copy of their front-door key.

If this sounds far-fetched, it shouldn’t. That’s the law on encryption codes that the British New Labour government is attempting to steamroller through. Even big business is up in arms at this astounding invasion of personal privacy, although as always, big business has an ulterior motive, a six-letter word beginning with P.

But surely all of this information-gathering is about fighting crime and thwarting terrorism? That’s the message that government ministers repeat until they are blue in the face. All of this state snooping, they assure us, is in a good cause: to protect the public from heroin dealers, paedophiles, and bloodthirsty bombers. Believe that, and you could possibly be persuaded that Elvis Presley is alive and well and working as a barman in Brechin.

Of course, it’s true that undercover surveillance is used to combat drug trafficking and such-like – though not with a great deal of success, it has to be said. But it would be naive to imagine that’s all there is to it. It is an interesting fact that the controversial RIP Bill, with its self-proclaimed goal of bringing state surveillance into the Internet age, is itself an extension of an earlier piece of legislation, the Interception of Communications Act 1985. This act was brought in by the Thatcher government, not as an anti-crime measure, but as an anti-subversion measure.

It was first introduced during the 1984–85 miners’ strike and its main purpose was to legitimise the mass telephone tapping of striking miners. It has since been used against a whole range of perfectly legal and respectable organisations, including trade unions, pressure groups, and political parties. The former general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Campbell Christie, even took the UK government to the European Court of Human Rights in 1994 to challenge the use of this legislation against the STUC, when it was discovered that telephone calls between Christie’s office and overseas trade unionists were being monitored.

In his disturbing book, The Enemy Within, Seumas Milne, a highly respected journalist with the Guardian, detailed the terrifying lengths to which the British state machine was prepared to go to defeat the miners’ strike. During that epic twelve-month conflict, 11,000 miners – one in ten of the entire workforce – were arrested. A total of £6 billion – in today’s money, almost the equivalent of the entire annual spending budget of the Scottish Parliament – was poured in by the government to break the strike.

The largest police mobilisations ever seen in the United Kingdom outside of Northern Ireland took place on an almost daily basis for an entire year. Covert army operations were organised. Strikebreakers were secretly funded by the state. The union’s assets were seized by the courts. The social-security laws were rewritten in an attempt to starve the strikers back to work. The secret intelligence services established a network of paid informers in every pit village in Britain. Hotels, strike headquarters and even fish-and-chip shops were bugged to enable the security forces to eavesdrop on private conversations. Mass telephone tapping, mail interception, and electronic surveillance operations were set up by GCHQ, MI5, and Special Branch. Agent provocateurs were even sent into the heart of the National Union of Mineworkers in an attempt to disrupt the organisation and frame its leaders on embezzlement charges.3

The striking miners were not drug barons or international terrorists. They were not even fighting to topple the government or to overthrow capitalism. Their battle was purely defensive: to save jobs, stop pit closures, and protect their communities. In other words, they were simply seeking to preserve the status quo.

The question naturally arises: if those are the lengths to which the British Establishment was prepared to go to defeat the miners, what desperate measures might they be prepared to take if faced with a serious challenge to their rule? For example, what would be the reaction of the British state if a socialist government were to be elected in Scotland?

After all, this may be a small country on the outer fringes of the European continent, but it is of enormous strategic importance to the faceless men and women who control the economic, political, and military operations of Western capitalism. Over 80 per cent of the European Union’s oil reserves are located in Scottish waters. The city of Edinburgh is the fourth most important financial centre in Europe after London, Frankfurt, and Milan. Meanwhile, Scotland is effectively the ‘aircraft carrier’ for NATO. It also harbours the biggest nuclear arsenal in Europe and furnishes the Western military alliance with a hugely disproportionate number of army regiments. Above all, Scotland has historically been a crucial component part of the United Kingdom, which for centuries has been one of the chief bulwarks of capitalism worldwide.

The ruling establishment in London and Edinburgh are desperate to hold Britain together and, if that proves impossible in the long term, they will strive with might and main to make sure that any future independent Scotland plays by the rules laid down by global capitalism.

The legendary Celtic and Scotland football coach, the late Jock Stein, used to drum a simple message into the heads of his players: ‘Never underestimate the opposition.’ Socialists striving to build a new society would do well to apply that advice to the political battlefield.

That doesn’t mean cowering before the rich and powerful like frightened schoolchildren hiding away from the school bully. The working class is by far the most numerous and most powerful force in Scotland today. Those with a real stake in capitalism – the stockbrokers and shareholders, the bankers and businessmen, the company directors and chief executives – are a tiny minority of the overall population.

But it would be na¹^:ve to imagine that those at the top of the capitalist hierarchy will simply shrug their shoulders and give up their power, prestige, and privileges just because everyone else wants to build a fairer society. A few exceptional individuals may be prepared to sacrifice their personal riches in the interests of social justice, but the majority of the ruling elite are likely to resist change by whatever means necessary.

The British upper classes have always sought to portray themselves as a uniquely civilised decent bunch of people, whose characters were forged on the playing fields of Eton, Rugby, and Gordonstoun where they learned to play fair and accept defeat gracefully.

Most myths are based on a vague glimmer of truth. For 150 years, Britain was a stable capitalist democracy. Britain remained largely inoculated from the high drama that characterised foreign politics; violent revolutions, military coups, civil wars, and fascist dictatorships were regarded as alien to the British way of life.

But Britain’s relatively tranquil political climate is not the result of some peculiar characteristic cultivated in the public schools, nor is it due to some genetic twist of fate. Britain’s democracy was purchased with the proceeds of the Empire. The respectable and god-fearing British ruling classes waded through oceans of blood abroad – or rather, they paid other people to wade through oceans of blood abroad – in order to accumulate the wealth necessary to buy social peace at home. Although the Empire is long gone, the apparatus of coercion in the hands of the UK Establishment remains formidable. As well as the secret police, it includes the 100,000-strong British Army, the Royal Navy, the RAF, the police, the judiciary, the Civil Service – all institutions which are run from the top down in a rigidly hierarchical fashion by people whose political views tend to place them somewhere to the right of the editors of the Sun and the Daily Telegraph.

All of this may sound a little bit frightening. After all, if the power of the capitalist state is so immense surely there is no point in even challenging it? Isn’t it best just to accept that the balance of forces it so heavily stacked against us that we should give up such a dangerous notion as changing society? Isn’t socialism a dangerous road to travel?

All genuine socialists abhor violence. Our goal is to build a society cleansed of all bloodshed and oppression, and we aim to create such a society by peaceful methods. We are confident that the case for socialism will eventually capture the hearts and minds of the majority of Scots, and that our programme of radical socialist change will sooner or later sweep all before it at the ballot box. But let’s look forward and try to anticipate the pitfalls and hazards that are strewn ahead. Let’s be concrete and imagine it’s the year 2010 or 2015 and the forces of democratic socialism have swept to power in a general election, perhaps within an independent Scotland.

What would be the consequences? What happens next? Would there be air strikes launched against Glasgow and Edinburgh by hostile foreign governments? Would a latter-day Edward I lead an invasion force north across the border to re-establish the rule of capitalism in Scotland? Or, alternatively, would the election of a socialist government in Scotland provoke a right-wing military revolt from within?

In politics, as in life generally, it’s always necessary to calculate the odds. That’s what we do whenever we cross the road, for example, and most of us cross roads every day. It would be foolish to refuse ever to cross a road for fear of the theoretical possibility of being run over. On the other hand, it’s always necessary to proceed carefully, paying due regard to the flow of traffic.

As with everyday life, that sense of balance has to be applied to the struggle for political change. We need to proceed courageously, while remaining alert to all possible dangers and taking whatever steps may be necessary to minimise risk.

The threat of military invasion is highly unlikely. It’s one thing for Western governments to launch air strikes against dictators in Baghdad or Belgrade; it would be a different matter entirely to attempt to militarily crush a democratically elected socialist government in Scotland.

Moreover, it is almost inconceivable that a socialist government could take power in Scotland except as part of a general upsurge of socialist radicalism across Europe and further afield. A victory for socialist change in Scotland would presuppose a seismic shift in the international balance of forces between Left and Right. Under these circumstances, governments in London, Brussels, and elsewhere would be more preoccupied with holding back the movement for socialism within their own backyards than with planning military adventures abroad.

But what of the danger of an internal backlash: a military coup, for example? After all, that’s what happened in Chile in the 1970s. There, a democratically elected socialist government was overthrown in a brutal military takeover orchestrated behind the scenes by the American CIA and spearheaded by Margaret Thatcher’s dear friend, General Augusto Pinochet. In the ensuing slaughter, tens of thousands of socialists, trade unionists, and human-rights activists were massacred.

Could the election of a socialist government in Scotland provoke such a savage reaction here? On the one hand, we should recognise that conditions in Europe at this stage are not exactly the same as in Latin America in the 1970s. In 1973, Chile was an island of democracy surrounded by military dictatorships. That was the normal form of government at that time in Latin America, and in parts of Europe too, including Spain, Portugal, and Greece. In Chile itself, although its parliamentary system had earned the country the nickname ‘the Britain of Latin America’, violence and repression against trade unionists and political dissidents had been commonplace throughout the 1950s and 1960s.

Even then, the Chilean generals were unable to launch an immediate coup against the left-wing government, which initially commanded the support of the rank and file of the armed forces and the police. Only three years on, after Chilean big business had brought the country to a state of chaos through prolonged economic sabotage, had the ground finally been prepared for the military junta to move in, with the support of the country’s large middle class.4

In Chile, the right wing pro-CIA parties were able to muster 45 per cent of the vote even in the early days of the Allende government, when his popularity was at its height. In contrast, despite the decade-long retreat of socialism, the traditional right-wing party in Scotland, the Tory Party, has been reduced to just 15 per cent of the popular vote.

For all of these reasons, it would be much more difficult for the ruling establishment to use military force against an elected socialist government in Scotland. But neither should we be complacent. In 1993, Roy Hattersley, then deputy leader of the Labour Party, issued this sombre warning: ‘Never underestimate the British establishment’s ruthless determination to destroy its enemies.’5 Another former deputy leader of the Labour Party, George Brown also explained, in one of his more lucid moments, that ‘no privileged group disappears from the scene of history without a struggle and usually with no holds barred’.

A future socialist government in Scotland could cut across the threat of reaction by building and sustaining mass popular support at home and abroad. That means very swiftly taking full control over the direction of the economy to prevent disruption and destabilisation by big business. It means creating a dense network of democratic committees in every community, every workplace, every university, to involve hundreds of thousands of people in the task of transforming society. It also means generating support right across the world and building a new socialist international to unite the forces resisting capitalism internationally. This task has been made immeasurably easier by the evolution of the World Wide Web, a medium used to spectacular effect by the Zapatista movement in Mexico over the past five years. Many commentators believe that, without the Internet, the peasant guerrillas of Chiapas would possibly have been crushed long ago by the Mexican government.6

A socialist government would also need to protect itself by dismantling the old hierarchical power structures and replacing these with new democratic institutions. For example, instead of moving towards a national police force, as New Labour and Tory politicians advocate, a socialist government in Scotland would move in the opposite direction, towards a more locally based community police force, under the control of local councils.

The authoritarian command structure of the present armed forces would be dismantled. The army, navy, and air force are effectively run by an officer caste who were educated at exclusive fee-paying schools, who have spent their whole lives in the rarefied environment of the military establishment, and who are subject to no democratic accountability. The armed forces themselves mirror the class divide within society as a whole, with top generals earning six-figure salaries while ordinary squaddies are paid just £13,000, out of which they have to pay for accommodation and food.

A socialist Scotland would reconstruct new defence forces, which would be democratic, egalitarian, and accountable. Instead of defending the Establishment against the people, which is the ultimate function of the armed forces under capitalism, their primary role would be to defend democracy against internal and external sabotage.

Of course, introducing such radical changes would involve challenging centuries of tradition and standing up to powerful vested interests. At each step in the struggle to transform Scotland from a capitalist country into a socialist country, it will be necessary to win over a majority of the population by arguing out the case for change powerfully and convincingly.

It would be dishonest to pretend that the transition to socialism will be achieved next week or next month. It will be a protracted process involving hundreds upon hundreds of struggles and ruptures, during which the old order will be torn asunder. But the battles for the future of Scotland are more likely to be political, social and industrial battles rather than military battles. Socialist should also take great encouragement from the successful struggles against oppression that have been waged internationally over the past two decades. Since 1979, a rogues’ gallery of American-backed dictators, including the Shah of Iran, Somosa in Nicaragua, Marcos in the Phillipines, and Suharto in Indonesia, have been toppled like traffic cones under the juggernaut of peaceful mass protest. In Eastern Europe too, mighty armies and feared secret police forces crumbled like sandcastles when mass mutiny erupted on the streets.

Although none of these revolutions led to the establishment of new socialist democracies, they all provided a glimpse of the real power that ordinary people possess when they act in unison. As the French writer Victor Hugo once declared, ‘No army can withstand the strength of an idea whose time has come.’

