---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Sixteen - Under New Management"
date:   2015-01-10 16:50:03
categories: book
---
IN 1971, INSPIRED by the UCS work-in, when thousands of Clydeside shipbuilders seized control of their yards, John Lennon wrote a number-one hit, ‘Power to the People’. One of the central tasks of socialism in the 21st century will be to bring that stirring slogan to life.

Socialism is not just about redistribution of wealth; it is also about redistribution of power. One of the first tasks of a socialist government would be to carry out a wholesale democratic transformation of society at local, national, and, eventually, international level.

Under capitalism, a powerful minority dictate to the majority. Ordinary people have no real say in how society is run. All the key decisions that affect our everyday lives – about our work, our environment, our health, our children’s education, our food, our public transport, our housing – are taken behind closed doors by tight-knit cliques of faceless bureaucrats and wealthy businessmen.

Every year, a large-scale survey of public attitudes throughout the UK is undertaken by the National Council for Social Research. In 1999, the survey found that 80 per cent of people believed that the income gap between rich and poor was too wide; 73 per cent believed that it was the government’s responsibility to narrow that gap; 66 per cent of people said they wanted higher spending on health, education, and welfare, even if that meant paying higher taxes; 70 per cent said that congestion in cities was a serious problem; and 93 per cent wanted an improvement in public transport.1

Other surveys conducted specifically in Scotland have shown massive support for a repeal of anti-trade-union legislation, for the closure of the nuclear bases on the Clyde, and for increased welfare and unemployment benefits.

If we lived in a real democracy which reflected people’s views, wealth would be redistributed from rich to poor. There would be vast increases in health, education, and welfare spending. Big resources would be ploughed into public transport to reduce congestion and pollution. Thatcher’s anti-trade-union legislation would be repealed. Instead of a relentless witch-hunt against the unemployed, benefits would be increased.

These are the things that the public want. But they get the opposite. Over the past 25 years, there have been five general elections and five different Prime Ministers in office – three Labour and two Tory. Yet, through all of these changes, the rich have grown richer and the poor poorer; spending on health, education, and welfare has been slashed; public transport has deteriorated; trade-union activity is more rigidly repressed in the UK than in any other state in Western Europe; unemployment benefits, pensions, and other state benefits have diminished.

Imagine you’re a pensioner lying at home suffering from an illness. You ask a neighbour to go to the shop and bring you back a loaf, a pint of milk, and a dozen eggs. Instead, she comes back with a tin of dog food, a bottle of sauce, and a tin of shoe polish and says: ‘I’ve brought you back these things instead, because I decided that’s what you really wanted.’

That’s roughly how British parliamentary democracy works in practice. There are some differences of course. For example, while you can ask a different neighbour to do your shopping the next time, you can’t get rid of a politician quite so easily. And, of course, unlike your neighbour, the politicians who ignore your instructions don’t do it voluntarily, they’re paid lavish sums of money to misrepresent you.

Parliamentary democracy is a very limited and partial form of democracy. It leads to passivity by encouraging people to ‘leave politics to the politicians’, rather than take control of their own lives. It is elitist because it creates a separate class of professional politicians who see themselves as more qualified, more intellectually equipped, more sophisticated than the broad mass of the population.

A 40-year-old in Scotland today will have had the opportunity to vote in just five general elections. If they live in a rock-solid Labour seat, as most Scots do, and vote for one of the other parties, their five votes will effectively have been wasted. Even if they did vote Labour, their vote would have made no difference to the outcome of any of these five elections.

To make matters worse, people in Scotland can vote overwhelmingly in one direction, and end up with a government that few people voted for. That’s what happened in four of the five general elections in which today’s 40-year-olds had the opportunity to participate; and that’s what will happen again and again in many future general elections until Scotland has its own independent parliament.

The right to vote is a basic human right which all socialists would defend to the death. But all elections should be conducted democratically, through proportional representation and on a level playing field, with, for example, equal access for all parties to the media. There is also an overwhelming case for annually elected parliaments and councils to ensure that the politicians are accountable to the people, not just once every four or five years, but constantly.

Nor should voting be condensed into a single day. Instead of a polling day, there should be a polling week, to ensure that everyone who wants to vote is able to do so. Socialists also advocate the right to vote at 16. It is outrageous that a 16-year-old who works for a living, and is perhaps even married with a family, should be denied the right to vote.

In a future socialist society, parliamentary representatives would no longer be a privileged elite with salaries and lifestyles way above the people they are supposed to represent. Instead they’d be paid the average salary of a skilled worker.

Even so, parliaments, whether located in Edinburgh or in London, are not the be-all and end-all of democracy. Serbia, for example, has a parliament complete with opposition parties. But a parliament does not signify genuine democracy any more than a paintbrush signifies a genuine work of art.

Socialism is about extending democracy to allow everyone to participate in the key decisions that affect their lives, their communities, and their nations. Socialism is about moving away from representative democracy – in which other people take all the important decisions on your behalf – towards direct democracy.

The whole of capitalist society is based on top-down hierarchical structures which rule through fear and favouritism, bullying and patronage. Those who conform are rewarded with promotion, while those who express dissent are banished into the wilderness. As a result, mediocrity rises to the top, while talent, originality, and creativity is stifled.

The whole system is lubricated with money. In a diverse range of organisations, from business corporations to trade unions, from local quangos to national governments, the higher you rise in the hierarchy, the greater your financial rewards. Under capitalism, it pays to be subservient to your superiors.

Socialism, by contrast, is about creating grassroots democracy from the bottom upwards. In a genuine socialist system, there could be mass decision-making on all the big issues through democratic referenda. There could also be maximum decentralisation of power right down to local communities and workplaces. And, in place of the unelected bureaucracies and hand-picked quangos that run whole areas of our lives under capitalism, there could be new administrative bodies which would be elected and subject to democratic control.

The idea of such a far-reaching democratic transformation of society will be bitterly opposed by the power structures that control our lives today. ‘You can’t have real democracy,’ claim the politicians and bureaucrats. ‘It’s utopian. It’s impractical. And in any case, we know best. Only we have the expertise required to take all these complicated decisions.’ In industry and commerce, top managers and executives are equally vehement in their opposition to workplace democracy. Any measure of workers control would result in chaos, they insist.

The idea that the broad mass of people are too ignorant or too stupid to take important decisions is deeply rooted in the class system. Back in the 1830s, the Chartist demand for universal suffrage was opposed unanimously by the rich and powerful. One of their main arguments was that it would lead to ‘mob rule’. The famous historian, Thomas Macaulay, thundered against the preposterous idea that the lower orders should have the right to vote, claiming that it would ‘lead to the destruction of civilisation and a return to barbarism’. Even the reformist philosopher, John Stuart Mill, made the point: ‘We dreaded the ignorance and especially the selfishness and brutality of the masses.’

A century and a half later, people look back in bewilderment at the idea that only people with property could be considered sufficiently responsible to have the right to vote. In the future, people will be equally bewildered at the lack of democracy in society today, where the mass of the population are excluded from real decision-making for exactly the same reasons that their ancestors were excluded from voting in the 19th century.

Why should key decisions that affect a community be taken by people who are not even part of that community? Why should politicians or council executives have the power to close down a school, a library, or a community centre without the permission of the local community? Why should government officials be entitled to bulldoze a motorway through a village or an urban neighbourhood without even consulting the people whose lives will be turned upside down by that decision?

On a national scale, why should the people of Scotland, without consultation, be forced to endure the existence of the largest nuclear arsenal in Europe barely 20 miles from the centre of Glasgow? Why should governments be allowed to sell off public assets at bargain basement prices to jumped-up Del Boys when most people want these assets to remain public property?

Unfortunately, even some people on the Left fear democracy. They lack confidence that their ideas will hold sway. They oppose referendums and secret ballots because they fear that they will lose the vote. Their paternalistic vision of socialism is based on the idea that it’s possible for an enlightened minority to impose progressive beliefs and values on everyone else. But the road to hell is paved with good intentions. Without grassroots democracy, in which the people as a whole have the ultimate say over the running of society, the result will be bureaucratism, oppression, and dictatorship.

Some people genuinely, but mistakenly, fear that any expansion of democracy would simply transfer more influence to the press tycoons. They argue that, whenever a referendum was called, mass-circulation newspapers like the Sun and the Daily Record would be able to sway public opinion in line with there own vested interests and the personal prejudices of their owners. Professional politicians, by contrast, are supposed to be immune from such pressures.

It is a mystery why anyone should imagine that political leaders are less easily manipulated than the general public. Rupert Murdoch, for example, owner of the Sun, The Times, The Sunday Times and BskyB, had the last three prime ministers of the UK in his back pocket – even though he is an American citizen and pays not a penny in taxes to the British exchequer.

Most people go about their daily working lives without a moment’s thought as to whether the editor of the Sun, or the Daily Record or the Daily Mail approves of what they’re doing. But not our top political leaders. Every move they make is influenced by what they think the press might say. Most ordinary mortals, by contrast, have a healthy scepticism towards the press, and certainly don’t spend a large part of then lives worrying about the next editorial in the Daily Express.

In any case, a socialist government would stand up to the media moguls and ensure that the future battle of ideas will be fought out on a level battleground. In a socialist society, minority and alternative newspapers, magazines, and radio and TV stations would be granted equal access to the most advanced printing, digital, and broadcasting technology. Distribution networks that are today monopolised by the giant media corporations could be opened up to everyone. There would be the flourishing of a genuinely free and diverse press and media which are not under the thumb of big business advertisers. At the same time, there could be an expansion of community and socially owned media organs, providing equal access to all shades of opinion on any contentious issues that arose.

The ruling classes will, of course, throw up all sorts of arguments against direct democracy. Like their great-grandfathers before them, they fear that the great unruly mob out there can never be trusted with real democracy. They’ll claim that it’s not practical. They’ll argue that it would be too time-consuming. They’ll maintain that it would be too costly to administer annual elections, repeated referenda, and new democratic administrative structures.

Ten years ago, such objections would have been at least partly valid. But the advance of technology has opened the door to a gigantic democratic leap forward. Even Tony Blair has promised that every household in the UK will be online within five years. Some experts have slammed Blair as too cautious and have argued that every household could be online within just two years. Direct democracy via electronic voting and online referenda is no longer the stuff of science fiction.

A socialist constitution could enshrine the right of people to organise petitions to demand a referendum on any local, regional, or national issue. As a safeguard, to prevent frivolous abuse of the new democratic constitution, a minimum number of signatures, based on a fixed percentage of the electorate, would be required to trigger a referendum.

Of course, only the big decisions would require nationwide referenda. Numerous day-to-day decisions have to be taken in any society. These routine decisions could naturally be delegated to managers and administrators. But, rather than being run from above by a top-down hierarchy, a future socialist democracy would be run from the grassroots upwards, with executives and managers fully accountable to those they serve.

Workplaces could be democratically run, with elected workers’ councils established in every sizeable workplace to ratify key decisions on wages, working conditions, the hiring and firing of labour, production targets, and investment. These workplace councils could in turn send delegates to industry-wide councils to formulate, in conjunction with the elected government and consumer groups a more general plan for the industry as a whole.

All anti-trade-union laws would be repealed. Trade unions would be completely free from all government interference. A free and independent trade-union movement will always be a necessary counterweight against abuse and exploitation, even in a democratic socialist state. The trade-union movement itself is certain to be transformed along more democratic lines in the course of the struggle for socialism, with the leadership fully under the control of the membership, and receiving broadly the same incomes as the workers they represent.

In a socialist Scotland, local democracy too will be vital. The existing network of community councils could be delegated far greater powers, including control over local budgets. A host of decisions that are today taken by officials who have no local knowledge could be devolved right down to neighbourhood level. Community councils, along with tenants and residents associations, could arbitrate over complaints of antisocial behaviour, take control over local policing, decide on any necessary traffic-calming measures, run local-community facilities, deal with housing allocations, and generally act as a community government accountable to local people.

Inevitably, there would be problems and conflicts, especially in the early days of socialist change. But that’s no reason for inertia. Whatever the difficulties involved in developing genuine grassroots democracy, these would be more than cancelled out by the dynamism and energy that could be unleashed by the involvement of hundreds of thousands of people across Scotland in the running of their communities and workplaces.

‘But this is a recipe for anarchy,’ the rich and powerful will no doubt object. ‘It’s utopian, it’s unworkable, it would lead to mayhem.’ For the ruling Establishment, the debate over the running of society is a game of ‘heads we win, tales you lose’. On the one hand, they try to whip up fear and suspicion by claiming that socialism would mean a centralised state bureaucracy dictating every detail of people’s lives. But then, on the other hand, they insist that democratic libertarian socialism – the polar opposite of bureaucratic Stalinism – is unworkable. This is, of course, very convenient, because it means that there is no alternative but to preserve the status quo. Fortunately, it doesn’t stand up to serious scrutiny.

It is true that no genuine socialist democracy has ever yet been established. But there have been enough tantalising glimpses of socialist democracy in action to prove its viability. For example, in Catalonia, in 1936–37, ordinary working people took over agriculture and industry and reorganised society along democratic lines. Railways, buses, shipping, gas and electricity-generating stations, textile mills, mines, car and engineering factories, food-processing plants, breweries, newspapers, department stores, hotels, bars, and restaurants were taken over by their workers and run on democratic lines.

In those heady days of revolution, even though there was a war against fascism raging across the whole of Spain, production hugely increased in Catalonia, allowing wages and living standards to rise. On the Barcelona trams, the number of passenger journeys rose by one million a week over the course of a year. The number of trams and services increased, fares were lowered, wages raised, and safety increased. During this time, the entire tramway network was run by the tramway workers themselves through mass meetings and democratically elected committees.2

In May 1968, in France, when students and workers brought the government to its knees in a revolutionary challenge to the old order, creative democracy flourished gloriously for a short period.

In Paris, neighbourhood committees of action sprang up and took over responsibility for local services and transport. In Nantes, the entire city was run directly by the people for a brief period. Working-class women in the city, together with local farmers, set up co-operative food outlets, cutting out the retail giants, and slashed prices.

Over 12,000 striking broadcast workers drew up alternative plans for the running of TV and radio. They proposed that all news coverage should be impartial, that there should be no government interference or pressure on broadcasters, and that political parties should have access to TV and radio proportionate to their support. Health workers drew up plans to reorganise hospitals along democratic lines. Even footballers took over the headquarters of the French Football Federation and demanded the democratisation of the game.3

Nearer home, a whole series of workplace and community struggles have provided living breathing testimony to the effectiveness of socialist democracy. In the early 1970s, faced with mass redundancies, thousands of shipyard workers took over the order books and ran four Clydeside shipyards for over a year. All the key decisions were taken at mass meetings of the entire workforce, while an elected co-ordinating committee dealt with the day-to-day running of the campaign.

Without anything like the resources that today’s charity extravaganzas are able to command, the Clydeside workers raised a phenomenal half a million pounds – the equivalent of around £10 million in today’s money. They also built international support for the campaign to the point where, right across the world, the initials UCS came to symbolise working-class resistance against social injustice, and working-class power in action.4

Fifteen years later, during the Caterpillar factory occupation in Lanarkshire, the workforce again carried on production after the factory had officially closed. Despite the lack of available materials, they managed to produce a huge earth-moving tractor, which they painted pink to distinguish it from Caterpillar products, which were painted in corporate bright yellow. Dubbed the Pink Panther, the workers’ tractor was donated to Live Aid and transported to Africa to assist the fight against famine.5

Today, in hundreds of communities across Scotland, thousands of voluntary and non-profit organisations from residents’ associations to bowling clubs, from parent-and-toddler groups to pensioners’ clubs operate efficiently without hierarchies, shareholders, or managing directors.

The Jack Jardine Memorial Hall in Glasgow’s Pollok housing scheme is an instructive example of community democracy in action. In 1997, this community facility, then called the Ladymuir Centre, was closed down by Glasgow City Council.

It had run clubs for the elderly. Bingo sessions, children’s discos, drama classes, dance classes had all been on offer. It had provided after-school care projects and college-tutored courses. It had been a focal point for young people who would gather in the centre to play pool, learn the guitar, or have a coffee and a chat.

When the closure was announced, the community sprang into action. They occupied the hall and elected a committee to take over the day-to-day running of the centre. The electricity was cut off by the council. So too were the telephones. There was no funding to buy equipment or to employ staff.

Yet, for three long years, local people battled on against all the odds to preserve this oasis of hope in a blighted deprived housing scheme. They were threatened with legal action, but carried on regardless. They raised cash. They acquired equipment. They organised gala days, fireworks displays, pensioners outings. Despite having to climb over mountain ranges of obstacles, such as the disconnection of electricity, they continued to provide activities such as bingo, band practice, yoga, sewing classes, children’s parties, a youth club.

They opened the doors of the hall to everyone in the community. After the three years, the authorities were forced to concede defeat and recognise that the centre should stay open under the control of the local community.

The legendary football manager, Bill Shankly, once described the co-operation and teamwork of a football team in action as a form of socialism. The Jack Jardine Memorial Hall, renamed after one of the late stalwarts of the campaign, is also a form of socialism in action, and provides a glimpse of the type of society we could build by harnessing the skills, talents, and energy of millions of ordinary people.

These examples are not exact blueprints for a future socialist democracy. But they do provide a glimmer of insight into the talent, the flair, and the organisational skills that ordinary people possess. That energy and creativity is stifled and suppressed by the hierarchical social structures of capitalism.

These antiquated structures may have served a purpose once upon a time. But in this new hi-tech century, they are becoming as obsolete as the feudal structures they replaced. Elitism, authoritarianism, hierarchy, and bureaucracy have had their day. Some time in the course of this century – and the sooner the better – they will be swept away and replaced with egalitarian democracy. As Bob Dylan sang, ‘Your old road is rapidly ageing.’