---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Eight - Grey Suits and Green Resistance"
date:   2015-01-10 16:03:31
categories: book
---
BEFORE HIS DEATH a few years ago, the maverick financial tycoon, James Goldsmith, was one of the wealthiest men on the planet. He lived a lifestyle which few people could even begin to imagine.

But in the final years of his life he began to worry about the threat of global warming. The more knowledge he accumulated, the more anxious he became. Writing to his brother Teddy, he said, ‘I feel like a man with a winning hand at poker … on the final night of the Titanic.’

The rich can escape most of the problems caused by capitalism. They never suffer hunger or homelessness. Their children are never taught in dilapidated overcrowded schools. They can shelter from crime by employing security staff and building the modern equivalent of the castle moat, the alarmed perimeter security fence. They can prolong their lives by buying access to the best medical care. Some genetic scientists have even predicted that, by the end of this century, the rich will be able to buy eternal life. But there is no hiding place, even for the Bill Gates and Rupert Murdochs, when the planet itself is threatened with extinction.

Yet, with the exception of individual mavericks like Goldsmith, the attitude of most big businessmen can be summed up in the phrase coined by the economist John Maynard Keynes, ‘In the long run we’ll all be dead.’ They might well add, ‘So in the short run we’ll just pile up as much profit as we can, even if that means destroying natural habitats, depleting the earth’s resources, and poisoning the air, the land, the seas.’

Bill Shankly, the famous football manager, was once asked in an interview if he believed that football was a matter of life and death. Jokingly, he replied, ‘No – it’s more important than that.’ The threat to the global environment really is more than just a matter of life and death. It is potentially about the extinction of the human species after millions of years of evolution.

‘But is this not just scaremongering by eco-warriors and na¹^:ve dreamers who want to halt all human progress?’ some people ask. That’s exactly what the people who run this planet want us to believe. But the threat of environmental destruction is serious, deadly serious.

Already, the needle has shot up into the red danger zone. Every second that ticks away, another ten acres of rainforest disappears. That’s a lot of disappearing rainforest – over 300 million acres a year. Every six minutes another species becomes extinct – that’s over 87,600 species wiped out every year. Every hour, almost seven square kilometres of fertile land is reduced to desert by global warming – that means every year a land area almost as large as Scotland becomes barren.1

Meanwhile the ocean floor is being systematically stripped of fish and other marine life by giant factory trawlers. The hole in the ozone layer continues to expand. The climate seems to be going haywire, with droughts and floods, typhoons and tornadoes, hurricanes and heatwaves, earthquakes and cyclones. As measured by average global temperature, 15 of the hottest years recorded have occurred in the past 20 years.2

Some of these changes may not appear at first glance to be all that important. Why should we be concerned about the fate of insects in the far away Amazon jungle? And even if the climate is changing, does it really matter?

The answer is, unfortunately, yes – it does really matter. Some time in the future, we may discover life on a distant planet. But we will never discover the exact life forms that exist on Earth. The way in which the species that inhabit our planet have evolved is a product of billions of interconnections. The human race itself could not have evolved separately and apart from the ecological system that surrounds us.

Just as the engine of a car is a finely-tuned combination of hundreds of parts, each of which relies upon the others to function, so the natural environment is a complex mixture of billions of related organisms. If the balance is repeatedly disturbed, the entire system can be thrown into disarray. As ecologists used to point out, under certain conditions the flap of a butterfly’s wings can trigger off an avalanche.

No-one knows the precise long-term effects of environmental desecration, or the exact speed at which the destruction of our planet is proceeding. Some scientists, including those at the Hadley Centre, which is linked to the UK Met Office, warn that within 50 years, the Earth could face disturbances so severe that the future of the planet could be called into question.3 Some of the less apocalyptic predictions include huge disruption of agriculture, the collapse of national economies, and the creation of millions of environmental refugees, as the sea submerges nations such as Bangladesh and turns other nations into vast deserts.

Others fear that human economic activity has already set in motion forces which are spiralling out of control. At a certain point, warns Peter Bunyard in The Ecologist, there could be runaway global warming with incalculable consequences for the future of the planet.4

For some environmentalists, the only solution is to halt all economic development. Others go even further and promote a ‘back to the land’ lifestyle and a return to a pre-industrial rural utopia, which as it happens, never existed outside the imagination of the authors of romantic historical novels. Before large-scale industry blighted the landscape, life was short and consisted of physical drudgery without end.

It is no more possible to turn back the calendar to an earlier economic age than it is to force the River Clyde to flow backwards. There are more people living on the planet today than there are people who have died throughout the whole of human history. And of the six billion inhabitants of our planet, at least three billion live in conditions of extreme poverty. Without large-scale industry, life on planet Earth would descend into barbarism.

But one thing is more clear than ever before: human progress cannot be a free-for-all. It has to be consciously planned and monitored. Manic haphazard economic growth, driven by the demands of shareholders for bigger and faster profits, is threatening the future of civilisation. The road to hell is paved with corporate balance sheets.

Every minute of every day, industry churns out mountains of cheap useless tacky goods, designed to instantly fall apart or stop working. Light bulbs, batteries, cigarette lighters, and a multitude of other products on the market are guaranteed to have a short lifespan, because if they had a long lifespan, demand for these products would collapse, and so would the profits of the companies that produce them.

Colossal amounts of time, resources, and physical and mental effort are devoted to inventing, developing, producing, marketing, and selling things that no-one really needs. In the 1970s sitcom, The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin, the main character opened a chain of ‘Grot Shops’, selling totally useless items at ridiculously high prices. Incredibly, 1970s satire has become 21st-century reality. For example, it’s possible to buy a variety of different walking boots, cotton-fleece sweaters, quilted jackets, and electric blankets – for your dog or cat! One commercially successful website is devoted exclusively to selling bizarre items such as nose-shaped pencil sharpeners, Spam-flavoured bubble gum, and a lollipop that doubles up as a fire extinguisher.

Through high-powered advertising, an artificial demand is created. One socialist economist pointed to the bizarre example of the funeral industry in America, which successfully marketed coffins with foam mattresses to keep corpses comfortable.5

Under a socialist economy, wasteful production could be reduced to a minimum. In some areas of the economy, increased production will be necessary. For example, where there is a problem of homelessness and sub-standard housing, one of the immediate priorities of any socialist government would be to employ construction workers to build houses. There will be a need, too, for a big expansion of public transport, which could involve excavating metros, laying down rail tracks, manufacturing trains, buses, minibuses, and ferries.

Agricultural production also needs to be increased on an international scale to wipe out starvation in the Third World. Back in the 1980s, Tracy Chapman sang, ‘How can a baby starve, when there’s enough food to feed the world?’ In the strictest technical sense, that may be the case. But, as the environmental writer, Susan George, points out in her book, The Lugano Report, this would mean the entire population of the world switching to exactly the same vegetarian diet of grains and pulses and an end to the production of such ‘luxury’ items as wine, beer, and various fruits and oils. Even then, there would still be nutritional deficiencies: for example, someone whose work consists of heavy manual labour needs 4500 calories a day, yet the maximum that could be provided with present harvests is 2300 calories per head.6

The giant biotechnology companies like Monsanto, AgrEvo and Norvartis proclaim genetically modified foods as the answer to starvation. Yet tests conducted so far show that biologically modified plants release toxins which can multiply and spread right across the food chain via spores and insects, with potentially nightmarish consequences for the whole of human, animal, plant, and insect life. The real aim of companies such as Monsanto is not to feed the Third World but to feed the greed of their own shareholders. Their ultimate aim is to wipe out traditional farming and grab control of the world’s food supply.

Socialists do not oppose scientific progress. But a whole series of catastrophes and cover-ups, from the Three Mile Island nuclear explosion to the Thalidomide scandal, have taught us that science under the control of big business can never be trusted.

Nothing short of a new agrarian revolution to oust the giant landowners and re-establish food production on a co-operative basis worldwide will be required to end starvation. But other areas of production could be scaled down, or even stopped completely, under socialism. In a future worldwide confederation of socialist states there would be no need for armaments production. With millions of nicotine addicts in the world today, it may take a generation or two to halt cigarette production, but it is likely that some time before the end of this century, dangerous drugs such as tobacco will be available only on prescription.

Wasteful production of luxury goods for the rich could be halted. Over the past decade there has been a global spending spree on executive jets, luxury yachts, private helicopters, mink coats, Rolls-Royces, and a whole array of items that devour resources, time, and labour, purely for the purpose of enhancing the prestige of the rich.

At the other end of the scale, quality-control systems would be introduced to stop the flooding of the world’s markets with cheap trashy goods, which generally end up in the rubbish bin within days of purchase.

The production of plastics, polystyrene, synthetic fibres, and other chemical products that pollute the atmosphere would be scaled down to a minimum, in favour of natural products. Wasteful production on packaging, junk mail, and the like would be strictly regulated, while recycling would become one of the big growth industries in a new socialised economy.

Today in the USA alone, 50 per cent of all paper and 90 per cent of all glass is used for packaging. A 1992 survey conducted in Britain found that of the average £75 supermarket shopping bill, £10 goes towards the cost of packaging.

A harmoniously planned socialist economy could also phase out fossil fuels – the biggest single cause of global warming – and move towards new forms of energy, including wind, wave, and solar power. In California, wind farms already supply the equivalent of San Francisco’s entire domestic power consumption.

The sun is an even more powerful generator of energy. Contrary to popular belief, it’s not necessary to have a Mediterranean climate before solar power can be harnessed. Just 15 minutes of sunshine has the potential to generate more energy than the world consumes in a year, and even Scotland enjoys the odd quarter of an hour of sunshine now and again. The sun could provide clean, safe energy for another billion years. Yet, right now, because no-one anywhere is putting serious money into researching and developing it, solar power only generates 0.001 per cent of the world’s energy.

This may seem a rather strange oversight on the part of the world’s economic and political leaders. Every day, new reports provide fresh evidence of galloping global warming, increasing pollution, and rising rates of bronchial disease due to noxious fumes. Surely it’s in everyone’s interests to change course?

Unfortunately, it’s not in everyone’s interests. There are indescribably powerful vested interests opposing the development of new sources of clean, safe, and sustainable energy. The fossil-fuel industries, for example, are worth one trillion dollars a year. And even capitalism has not yet devised a way of privatising the wind, or of floating the sun on the stock exchange, or of selling the sea off to the highest bidder.

Companies like BP-Amoco are part of the Global Climate Coalition, a benevolent-sounding organisation, which actually promotes global warming by campaigning against restrictions on fuel pollution. The GCC employs scientists on sky-high salaries to create a veneer of objectivity, and spin doctors on similarly inflated salaries to misinform and mislead the public.

The big oil and vehicle-manufacturing companies will move Heaven and Earth to protect their profits and investments. Some years ago, General Motors, Standard Oil, and the Firestone Tyre Company actually conspired to destroy electric-rail transport systems in 45 American cities. General Motors bought over the systems, ripped up the tracks, and replaced the electric trains with buses as a way of forcing the government to construct new roads.8

Some environmentalists like to stand above the murky old politics of class, capitalism, and socialism. ‘Neither Left nor Right but Green’ is their motto. This attitude is partly a backlash against the Stalinist model of bureaucratic centralism pursued in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. These states vandalised the natural environment with the same reckless abandon with which transnational capitalism desecrates the planet. Events like Chernobyl caused appalling devastation way beyond the borders of the Soviet Union itself. But rejecting socialism because of the appalling track record of Stalinism is like refusing to eat mushrooms because toadstools are poisonous.

The battle between socialism and capitalism is essentially a conflict over whether the resources of the planet should be owned and controlled by a wealthy minority, or by the people of the planet. The radical environmentalist who refuses to take sides in that struggle between Left and Right is like the condemned man who refuses to take sides in the argument over capital punishment.

Inevitably, there will be big debates within the socialist movement and in a future socialist society over environmental questions. There will be conflict between those who want to emphasise conservation and those who want to emphasise sustainable economic development. There will be disputes over the pace of change, for example, from traditional fossil fuels to alternative forms of energy. There will be wide-ranging discussions on how best to protect the planet’s resources while prosecuting the war against poverty and want. There will be all sorts of disputes on all sorts of issues at local, national, and international level.

But without democratic ownership of land, industry, transport, energy, and finance, there can be no real democratic control. Ultimately, the destiny of the planet is a political fight to transfer ownership of the planet from the billionaires to the billions.

No way does that mean environmentalists should stop fighting back against road-building projects, or against toxic-waste dumps, or against opencast mines, or against nuclear power. One of the best slogans of the environmental movement is ‘Think global, act local’. But the struggle to save the planet is more than just a series of unconnected battles to stop this road, to save this natural habitat, or to close down this poisonous landfill site. We have to fight many individual battles, but we also have to win the war eventually.

Like the war against global poverty, the war against global environmental destruction has to begin at home. The building of a green socialist Scotland some time within the first few decades of this new century would not protect Scotland against the impact of global warming. Pollution knows no national boundaries – the east coast of the Republic of Ireland is as much affected by the radioactive poisons from the Sellafield nuclear-power plant as the west coast of England, Wales, or Scotland. Nonetheless, the defeat of capitalism by red-green forces in any country, even in a small country the size of Scotland, would represent a huge advance for the forces of socialism and radical environmentalism.

Most people from outside look at Scotland and imagine that it’s some kind of environmental paradise. We live in one of the most sparsely populated countries in Europe, with vast wildernesses of moor and mountain, thousands of miles of coastline, thousands of islands, lochs, rivers, and a temperate climate.

But this small country is also home to most of Europe’s nuclear weapons. Our seas to the north and east are ravaged for oil and gas by corporate pirates, who have now begun to explore the spectacular ocean wilderness surrounding St Kilda in the far north-west. Our seas to the south-west contain over a million tons of conventional and chemical weapons. Parts of the northern Highlands have been turned into dumping grounds for nuclear waste from all over the world.

Opencast mining is marauding across the central belt, turning huge tracts of picturesque countryside into ugly scars. Lorryloads of toxic waste from the Home Counties career through our towns and villages en route to toxic-waste dumps in Lanarkshire. Poisonous cocktails of deadly metals are being pumped into the Forth. There have been numerous radioactive leakages into the Firth of Forth from Rosyth, and into the Firth of Clyde from Faslane.

Under new ownership, under new management, we could turn Scotland into a clean green country, a living breathing example of socialist environmentalism in action. We could close down the Trident nuclear bases and use some of the savings to retrain and redeploy the entire Faslane and Coulport workforce. As Scottish CND has repeatedly pointed out, if the costs of Trident were redirected to other areas of the economy, for every one job lost, another five could be created.

We may not be able to make Dounereay completely safe; the damage has already been done. But we could make it a great deal safer than it is right now. We could also use some of the proceeds from North Sea oil to pioneer wind, wave, and even solar energy. We could seal off the pollutants that contaminate our seaways. We could close the toxic dumps and halt the desecration of our natural landscape by the opencast mining companies.

We could transform public transport. Politicians spout endlessly about the need to reduce car usage. But sometimes a ten-minute car journey can take up to an hour by bus. You’ve walked to the bus stop, you’ve waited for the bus to arrive, you’ve felt your blood pressure rising as the bus winds its way slowly through city streets, stopping for a couple of minutes every few hundred yards to pick up more passengers. The next time you just take the car.

In a socialist Scotland, investment would be ploughed into building a hi-tech, low-fare, super-efficient public-transport system. The exact shape of a radical new public-transport network could be worked out democratically, with communities, transport workers, environmental specialists, and local and national government all involved in drawing up plans for improving existing systems and initiating new projects.

The reopening of the rail network that used to criss-cross rural Scotland, the extension of the Glasgow Underground to the outlying housing schemes and the suburbs, the excavation of a new metro system in Edinburgh, the establishment of a system of on-call minibuses to take passengers to the nearest rail station or bus terminus; all of these measures and much, much more would be possible.

But not while we are at the mercy of privatised rail and bus companies whose sole aim is to maximise their own profits. Social ownership of the bus, rail, and ferry companies wouldn’t automatically reduce car use or provide an overnight solution to all the transport problems we face. But it could be and should be the starting point for a transport revolution in Scotland.

An independent socialist Scotland could also instigate an agricultural revolution by banning genetically modified crops and foods and farm crops and subsidising our farmers to switch to organic production. There has been an explosive growth internationally in the demand for organic food. Tesco reported a 20-fold increase in sales of organic produce over three years; Sainsbury reported a 125-fold increase over four years. Yet 70 per cent of organic foods are imported, and are also expensive. Only 1.5 per cent of the total farmed land in Britain is devoted to organic agriculture. Yet only £6 million in aid has been made available in the last year to help farmers convert to organic methods.9

These changes are not outlandish fantasies. They are practical, they are sensible, they are rational. But even these moderate measures to restore the balance of nature and to protect the health and safety of the people of Scotland would require revolutionary changes in the way society is organised.

We could leave well alone, cross our fingers, and hope that the scientists, the ecologists, the meteorologists, the naturalists, the horticulturalists have got it all wrong and the businessmen have got it all right. Or we can resign ourselves to the fact that, yes, there is a problem, and with any luck somebody, somewhere, some time, will do something about it. But, as another slogan of the international green movement warns, ‘Tomorrow may be too late.’