---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Seventeen - The Growling Mongrel"
date:   2015-01-10 16:51:03
categories: book
---
SOCIALISM IS AN internationalist philosophy. In the words of the song, ‘Imagine there’s no countries, I wonder if you can; nothing to kill or die for, a brotherhood of man.’

Some time in the future these words will be turned into reality. The resources of the world will become common international property. People will look back in horror to the days when the world was divided into hundreds of warring tribes, each armed to the teeth with tanks, machine guns, battleships, and fighter aeroplanes. Future generations will be incredulous at the very notion of scientists and technicians spending their lives designing and refining weapons capable of reducing the whole planet to dust. They will look back in astonishment to the dawn of the 21st century, when the people of one rich country consumed 50 times as much food per head as the people of one poor country. And they will scarcely believe the historians when they describe how the planet itself was almost obliterated from the solar system to satisfy the insatiable greed of a small minority.

Back in the 1840s, the socialist philosophers, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, first raised the idea of a socialist world. In the days before cars, telephones, and radios had even been invented, such a vision required a phenomenal historical imagination. But in the age of the Internet, high-speed air travel, instantaneous global communications, satellite TV, and global capitalism, the idea of global socialism can no longer be dismissed as a flight of poetic fantasy.

So where do we begin? How do we get from here to there? How could a lone parent in Dundee, a nurse in Glasgow or a factory worker in Fife possibly participate in such a colossal enterprise as building worldwide socialism?

The fact is, the struggle to transform the planet we live on is as much a local struggle as it is a global struggle. Worldwide socialism will not be achieved in one broad sweep; it will be the final product of multiple movements against capitalism at community, regional, and national level.

The spread of genuine socialism in the future will be just as contagious as the pro-democracy movement which engulfed Eastern Europe in 1989–90. A series of local demonstrations in the East German city of Leipzig in late 1989 rapidly spread right across the country, then expanded outwards into neighbouring states. Within a few months, every Stalinist regime in Eastern Europe had collapsed. Although the story had no happy ending, it nonetheless demonstrated the lightning speed at which events can reverberate across international borders.

The struggle for socialism is unlikely to erupt simultaneously across the globe. Nor will it unfold evenly and uniformly. Because of differing national traditions and conditions, any future movement against capitalism is likely to evolve in a fragmented and disjointed fashion, with events in one country spreading rapidly across international borders.

There is an important socialist dimension to the national question in Scotland today, and an important national dimension to the struggle for socialism. Many people support the idea of independence, not because they are parochial nationalists or anti-English bigots, but because they want greater control over their own lives and want to move towards a more egalitarian society.

It is no accident that those most strongly in favour of an independent Scotland are young people and working-class people. In general, the people who want radical constitutional change are the same people who want radical social change. For a growing number of people in Scotland, the break-up of the British state means striking out in a revolutionary direction and burying the past.

Neither is it a coincidence that big business, with the exception of one or two isolated mavericks, is bitterly hostile towards the idea of independence. After more than two decades of Thatcherism – first under Thatcher, then under Major, and now under Blair – the United Kingdom has been transformed into a free-market paradise with some of the highest profit levels, the lowest wages, and the most repressive anti-trade-union laws in the western world.

The cringeing unionism of Scotland’s bankers, landowners and wealthy businessmen conforms to a historical pattern stretching back 1000 years. Over and over again, almost from time immemorial, Scotland’s ruling classes have worked with the English ruling classes to suppress dissent.

Scotland is one of the oldest nations in Europe. As far back as the 13th century, the beginning of a national consciousness was forged during the struggle against the forcible incorporation of Scotland into Edward the First’s fendal kingdom. Under his reign of terror over Scotland, 2000 members of the Scottish nobility – earls, barons, and bishops – signed the oath of allegiance to the English king. It was left to an outlaw, William Wallace, and his co-leader, Andrew Murray, to organise a mass movement of resistance. Their ragged guerrilla armies were made up of the landless peasantry, the craftsmen, the dispossessed nobility, and the poor.

In contradiction of the mythology propagated by right-wing groups in America, who elevated the film Braveheart into a celebration of Celtic national-racial purity, Wallace’s army included Irish, French, Flemish, and English immigrants and united Gaelic-speaking Highlanders and English-speaking Lowland Scots.

Only after Wallace had swept through Scotland did the nobility eventually switch sides. Even then, their support for an independent Scotland was half-hearted and unreliable. Although Wallace was eventually defeated and tortured to death, his campaign set Scotland ablaze. The Wars of Independence raged on for the next 30 years, culminating in the victory of Robert the Bruce at the Battle of Bannockburn.

As a result, Scotland became an independent kingdom, while Wales and Ireland were held in chains as colonial possessions of the English aristocracy. The victory at Bannockburn enabled Scotland to evolve independently into a rudimentary nation-state with its own native ruling class and its own separate national economy.

But by the end of the 17th century, particularly as a result of the disastrous ‘Darien Scheme’, a vain attempt to compete with English and Spanish imperialism by establishing a colony in Central America, the Scottish ruling class had almost bankrupted the country. The bankers, landowners, and merchants began to turn to England for economic salvation.

After months of debate, the elite Scottish Parliament, elected by just 4000 people, backed the Act of Union. In effect, they sold Scottish independence for £400,000 cash, plus lucrative personal bribes and posts in the new British administration. The writer, Daniel Defoe, working in Edinburgh as an agent of the English government, wrote, ‘The great men are posting to London for places and honours … I never saw so much trick, sham, pride, jealousy and cutting of friends’ throats as there is among the noblemen. In short, money will do anything here.’1

Later, Robert Burns wrote:

> ‘What force or guile could not subdue  
> Thro’ many warlike ages  
> Is wrought now by a coward few  
> For hireling traitor’s wages  
> The English steel we could disdain  
> Secure in valour’s station  
> But English gold has been our bane  
> Sic’ a parcel of rogues in a nation.’2

[a]This was no federal union of two sovereign states. The English ruling class was not interested in forming an equal partnership or union with Scotland. Although allowed to retain its own church, its own legal system and its own education system, Scotland was stripped of all political and economic autonomy.

Outside parliament, Scotland was in uproar. English troops were moved to the border ready to mount an invasion as riots swept Edinburgh and Glasgow in protest at the decision to dissolve the Scottish Parliament. One English government agent in Edinburgh estimated the mood in Scotland at around 50 to 1 against the Union.3

Discontent with the union continued to fester for decades. By promising to restore the Scottish Parliament, Charles Edward Stuart, a French Catholic, built mass support in the Highlands and passive support even in the Presbyterian Lowlands as he launched his bid for the British throne in 1745. The Jacobite Rebellion was only routed after ‘Bonnie Prince Charlie’ marched into England. Later, with the rise and rise of the British Empire, Scotland’s ruling classes started to turn more and more anglified. During the 19th century, they even began to drop the term ‘Scotland’ completely, preferring to describe themselves as ‘North British’.

By contrast, within radical circles and especially in the emerging Labour movement, there remained a powerful yearning for Home Rule. This reflected the existence of an anti-imperialist sentiment and an affinity with Ireland and other oppressed nations of the British Empire.

In 1820, the Scottish Insurrection led by the weavers under the slogan ‘Scotland: Free or a Desert’, demanded universal suffrage and Scottish independence.4 Keir Hardie’s Scottish Labour Party, formed in 1888, included the demand for Home Rule as the fifth point in an 18-point programme. The Scottish TUC, formed as a radical breakaway from the British TUC in 1897, adopted a pro-Home Rule policy in 1914. Eight years later, when ten Independent Labour MPs were elected from Clydeside to Westminster, their first act was to present a Bill to the House of Commons calling for Scottish Home Rule.

Around the same period, the heroic Clydeside socialist, John MacLean, called for an independent Scottish socialist republic. In many ways, MacLean was a visionary, decades ahead of his time. In the early 1920s, MacLean’s tiny Scottish Workers’ Republican Party was the only pro-independence party in existence.5 The SNP was not even formed until more than decade after MacLean’s death and even then remained a marginal force in Scottish politics, with less than one per cent support for the first 25 years of its existence.6

Today unionism in Scotland is fighting a rearguard action. The closing decades of the 20th century witnessed a clear long-term trend towards the break-up of the United Kingdom and the creation of an independent Scotland.

It is a paradox of our times that in the age of global capitalism, when the ruling powers of the planet seek desperately to break down national boundaries and form huge trading blocs such as the European Union, the impulse from below is in the opposite direction.

The rise of nationalism internationally is a contradictory phenomenon. The fuel that drives the engine of national discontent is a complex mixture of emotions, grievances, prejudices, aspirations, and ideals. Some of these sentiments are reactionary, xenophobic, and parochial. Others are saturated with the spirit of democracy and justice. For many people, especially in small stateless nations such as Scotland, Wales, and the Basque Country, national identity is linked with opposition to centralism, regimentation, and uniformity.

In any nationalist movement, progressive and reactionary ideas invariably exist side by side. In some parts of the world, the character of nationalism is predominantly aggressive, tribalistic, and inward-looking. In the Balkans, nationalism has led to the tearing apart of integrated communities, ethnic cleansing, and rivers of blood as violent conflict rages over disputed territories.

That is not the case in Scotland, where the demand for national independence is about opposing nuclear weapons, standing against inequality, and prioritising public services over private greed. Contrary to unionist mythology, pro-independence sentiment and anti-English bigotry are two entirely different phenomena. Of course, there are Scottish nationalists who are bitterly anglophobic. But there are also plenty of tartan-clad rugby fans who will cheerfully belt out anti-English anthems at Murrayfield and then go to the ballot box and vote for the staunchly pro-union Tory Party. There are multitudes of football fans who work themselves into a frenzy of hostility whenever they see a white England football shirt on their TV screens, and vote for the equally staunch unionist Labour Party.

One of the most powerful arguments in favour of Scottish independence is precisely that it would remove a central cause of anti-English prejudice. Scotland’s psyche has been forged by its status as a dependent nation, forced to submit politically to the will of its larger neighbour.

In the 1980s and early 1990s, when the Tories won four successive general elections in Britain, national tension in Scotland began to boil. In a confused way, anti-English sentiment became mixed together with anti-Toryism and working-class resentment against wealth and privilege. This was especially the case in some scenic rural areas, as affluent incomers from the booming South of England bought over property, driving up property prices and forcing locals in some instances to live in makeshift huts and caravans.

New Labour hoped the establishment of a Scottish Parliament would reduce these tensions. But, because the parliament has no powers over welfare, or employment, or nuclear weapons, and has only limited fiscal powers, that sense of political impotence will continue to fester. Especially if, at some stage in the future the Tory Party returned to government at Westminster, the embittered backlash in Scotland could make even the resentment of the Thatcher years appear like a lovers’ tiff by comparison.

On the other hand, an independent Scotland with full control over its own economy, welfare system, and environment could eventually pave the way for the demise of anglophobia. In the early part of the 20th century, similar national tensions between the peoples of Norway and Sweden began to ease after Norway broke free, following a successful independence referendum. There has since evolved close co-operation among the Scandinavian countries; for example, the labour movements of the various countries campaign for common standards of welfare, wages, and conditions. There is also Scandinavia-wide co-ordination of railway timetables, roads, telecommunications, airlines, and postal services, even though the individual states remain politically independent of one another.

An independent Scotland would be forced to take responsibility for its own actions and could begin to forge a co-operative relationship with England on a free and equal basis rather than a subordinate relationship based on coercion and resentment.

Socialists should be prepared to support such a step, even on a non-socialist basis as promoted by the SNP. At the very least, the creation of an independent Scotland would begin to dispel the illusion that Scotland’s problems could be solved simply by swapping the Union Flag for the St Andrew’s Flag and replacing a right wing pro-market British government with a right-wing pro-market Scottish government. Democratic socialism, stronger today in Scotland than in any other part of the UK, would then be poised to become the main opposition force, and eventually the dominant force within an independent Scotland.

That doesn’t mean winding up socialism in the meantime to concentrate on the fight for independence. That would only marginalize socialism and strengthen the hand of those right-wing nationalists who want to turn Scotland into a corporate colony with cheap labour, few public services, low business taxes, and oceans of profit for the transnationals. The strength of socialism in a future independent Scotland will be determined not just by what happens after the break-up of Britain, but by how effectively the ideas of socialism have permeated Scotland in the years leading up to independence.

There is no truth in the accusation that socialists who support the dissolution of the United Kingdom are anti-English, or anti-England. There is a difference between being anti-England and anti-United Kingdom. It is not England that oppresses Scotland and stifles its political development; it is the British state, which is controlled by a ruling class drawn from all four parts of the United Kingdom. But because England has seven times the population of the other three parts of the UK combined, its politics, economics, and culture have tended to dominate and submerge the rest. At the same time, national identity in all four parts of the UK has become warped and distorted – in England by a sense of superiority deriving from its dominant role in an imperialist state; in Scotland by a permanent sense of resentment towards its domineering neighbour.

For many people in Scotland, and in England too for that matter, English national identity can appear insular and backward-looking. When John Major outlined his view of English identity, he painted a romanticised picture of an Anglo-Saxon Brigadoon, complete with old maids cycling through autumn mists and rustic men sipping warm beer while watching cricket on the village green. A more sinister interpretation of English national identity is conveyed by tabloid newspapers like the English Sun, with their vile editorials abusing ‘Krauts’, ‘Frogs’, and ‘Argies’, and by the neo-Nazi cults and the football hooligans who spew imperial-racist mumbo-jumbo that would insult the intelligence of the average ten-year-old while brandishing the Flag of St George.

Socialists, naturally, oppose all forms of national chauvinism. It is right that socialists in England and Scotland stress their internationalist identity as part of the global working class. But on both sides of the border, socialists should also battle to rescue the progressive and inclusive sides of English and Scottish national identity.

In the 1950s, the American socialist leader James Cannon expressed regret that radicals in the United States had renounced the Fourth of July celebrations. ‘It is wrong to confuse internationalism with anti-Americanism,’ he argued.7 Socialists in England, as well as in Scotland and Wales, should battle to reclaim the best of their national traditions from the jingoists and racists.

England is the land of great literary figures, such as Shakespeare, Shelley, Keats, Milton, Chaucer, Dickens, and many others. More recently, especially in the 1960s, it became the birthplace of some of the world’s greatest and most innovative popular music. England also has an important radical and egalitarian tradition, running like a red thread through three centuries. English schoolchildren have traditionally been force-fed tales of the imperial adventures of successive monarchs, while the country’s radical, democratic, and revolutionary tradition has been suppressed. This stretches back to the Levellers and the Diggers, the egalitarian revolutionary groups of the 17th century, and proceeds through to the Chartists, the militant struggles to establish the first industrial trade unions, the 1926 General Strike, and the three dramatic clashes between the National Union of Mineworkers and the Tories in the 1970s and 1980s.

Today, England is one of the most multicultural countries in Europe, with over 150 languages spoken on the streets of London alone. Indeed, neither England nor Scotland conforms to the racially pure myth peddled by fascist groups in Britain and by the white-supremacist descendants of Scottish settlers in the southern states of the USA.

Like England, Scotland has changed down through the ages, culturally, linguistically, and socially. The entire history of the country has been one of emigration and immigration. From Ireland, Scandinavia, England, Northern Europe, Eastern Europe, Italy, Pakistan, India, and China, successive waves of settlers have poured into Scotland over the centuries.

As the novelist William McIlvanney once memorably put it, ‘The Scots are a mongrel race.’ In Scotland today we have Asian-born Scots, Irish-born Scots, English-born Scots, Italian-born Scots, and Scottish-born Scots. We have Gaelic-speaking Scots, Doric-speaking Scots, and English-speaking Scots. We have Highland Scots, Lowland Scots, and Scots in the Northern Isles whose historic links are with Scandinavia.

A socialist Scotland would aim to break down prejudices and rivalries within Scotland, while allowing a large degree of autonomy for any community – geographical, ethnic, or linguistic – which sought a measure of control over its own affairs. It would fight for the survival of the Gaelic language and ensure that everyone who wants to learn the ancient tongue has the opportunity to do so. In the past, Scotland’s native cultural traditions were brutally suppressed in the past by London governments and their Scottish unionist allies. Today, the threat to Scots or Gaelic culture tends to come from media moguls such as Rupert Murdoch, whose worldwide ownership of newspapers and TV and radio stations enables them to exert a poisonous influence over the development of culture in all countries, large and small.

But an independent socialist Scotland would not be an isolationist Scotland. It would not involve rebuilding Hadrian’s Wall and quarantining ourselves from the rest of the world. Instead, a socialist Scotland would be forward-looking and outward-looking. It would immediately build links with political, environmental, trade-union, and pro-democracy movements all over the globe to launch a united worldwide crusade against global capitalism.

The other side of globalisation is that even the slightest crack in the structure would weaken the entire edifice. The system may today seem invincible. At the start of the 1980s, Stalinism seemed like an indestructible monolith. In the mid-1980s, the apartheid regime in South Africa looked impregnable. The whole history of the 20th century illustrates that institutions, governments, and social systems which one day appear to be as permanent as the sun and the moon can the next day become history.

Any serious move towards democratic socialism in the 21st century, in Scotland or in any other country, would have earth-shattering consequences. At the very least, a successful challenge to capitalism in Scotland would attract worldwide sympathy and would help to dramatically accelerate the advance of genuine democratic socialism internationally.