---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Two - Who Needs Class War, Anyway?"
date:   2015-01-10 15:20:03
categories: book
---
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE across the UK dream of winning the jackpot on the National Lottery and becoming overnight millionaires. The chances are that if you keep buying a ticket every Wednesday and Saturday you will eventually hit the jackpot. That’s on one condition – that you live for about 20,000 years.

Just imagine, then, waking up in the morning to discover you’re £2 million richer than you were yesterday. The following morning you’re another £2 million richer. Every day you wake up, you’ve won another lottery jackpot. Within a month you’re a millionaire 60 times over. And by the end of a year, your personal wealth has increased by £740 million.

For 20 people in Britain today, this is no idle fantasy. During 1999, 20 individuals, including the Duke of Westminster, Richard Branson, and the shadowy Barclay twins, who own the Scotsman newspaper, saw their wealth rise on average by £2 million a day.[1](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-1)

On a global scale, the wealth that is now concentrated in the hands of the ultra-rich is even more fantastic. If the richest man on the planet, Bill Gates, was a country, he would rank 38th richest nation in the world out of 200. At the start of the millennium, his personal wealth was calculated at £50 billion, a sum of money which no individual could ever hope to spend. If he went on the most extravagant spending spree imaginable, lashing out £1 million every day, it would take the Microsoft boss 136 years to spend his fortune.

In a Newsnight interview with Gates, presenter Jeremy Paxman made the point that if he were to drop a $10,000 bill on the floor, it would not be worthwhile for the computer tycoon to reach down and pick it up – because in the time it took him to do that, he’d be more than $10,000 richer anyway.[2](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-2)

When the tomb of Tutankhamen was excavated in 1922, it was discovered to contain a dazzling collection of works of art and a solid gold coffin. But the extravagant lifestyles led by the ultra-rich of the 21st century make the Pharaohs of ancient Egypt look like Spartans by comparison.

Imagine a mansion made entirely of gold. The floors and ceilings are gold. The tables and furniture are gold. The doors and walls are gold. The cutlery and crockery are gold. This is not a fantasy Hollywood film set, but a real house in the United States.

Then there’s the watch that’s locked away in a bank vault in Geneva. Encrusted with 118 emerald-cut diamonds, it’s known as the Kalista, after the Greek word which means ‘most magnificent’. And magnificent it certainly should be, because it’s currently valued at £6 million. Or at least that was its value at the start of the year 2000, but every day the value of the Kalista watch appreciates by a further £25,000.

These are perhaps extreme examples of ostentatious luxury. More everyday transactions include the bottles of Pinot Noir that sell for £10,000 each in top restaurants, the Rolls-Royce cars that sell for £150,000, the Gulfstream private jets that cost £50 million, the private yachts that cost £5 million, the £10,000 Hermès handbags, the baby grand pianos which sell for £100,000, the racehorses, the helicopters, the art treasures, the private gymnasiums, the private spas and whirlpools.

A truly incredible amount of human labour and natural resources are devoted to furnishing a tiny minority of the world’s population with every luxury imaginable, and some which are unimaginable. A Rolls-Royce for example, takes six months to construct. Every engine is completely hand-built. The interior includes hand-finished leather hides, precisely fitted luxury carpets, and exquisitely hand-crafted walnut wood panelling. A small army of highly skilled electricians, engineers, mechanics, upholsterers, painters, and carpenters spend half a year assembling a single vehicle that will then become the exclusive personal property of a single individual.

Yet the work involved in assembling a Rolls-Royce is negligible compared to the time, labour and materials that go into the construction of a luxury yacht, for example, or a private helicopter. It is truly amazing that this gargantuan devouring of resources by the ultra-rich is taken for granted while health spending in Africa – a continent plagued by some of the most dreadful diseases known to science – works out at a miserable £4.50 per person per year.[3](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-3)

According to most mainstream politicians, businessmen, and media commentators, the co-existence of rich and poor is as natural and inevitable as the co-existence of the sun and the rain. The rich are rich because they deserve to be rich. They are more talented, more hardworking, more dynamic, and more intelligent than the rest of us. And in any case, the wealth they accumulate trickles down to the very depths of society, so we all benefit. Indeed, the more the rich get richer, the more the poor get richer.

That’s what we’re told, anyway – and you’d better believe it, because it’s not just the Tories who worship before the ‘creators of wealth’ and insist that, without them, all of civilisation would grind to a halt. One New Labour Minister, Stephen Byers, told the big-business CBI conference in 1999, ‘Wealth creation is more important than wealth redistribution.’

His boss, Tony Blair, insists, ‘Britain needs more successful people who can become rich.’ He repeatedly assures us, ‘The class war is over.’[4](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-4)

For the 5000 people in Britain who earned over £500,000 last year, that is good news indeed. Who needs class war when you’re busy maintaining a smattering of stately homes, chic apartments, and Mediterranean villas? Why fritter away your precious time on old-fashioned pursuits like class warfare when you can be lounging around the golf course, skiing in the Rocky Mountains or sunning yourself in the Seychelles?

The truth is, the rich may not preach class war so much these days, but they practise it ceaselessly. Every week in British industry and commerce, top executives are awarded special bonuses for increasing profits and share prices. As a general rule, they achieve these results by sacking workers, cutting wages, worsening conditions, and coercing their workforces into working a little bit harder. In other words, the rich get richer, not by trickling wealth down to the working class and the poor, but by making the working class and the poor even poorer.

The statistics for the growth of wealth and poverty in Britain over the past 20 years strip bare the myth of the so-called ‘trickle-down theory’. Far from trickling down from the rich to the poor, wealth has trickled upwards – or, more accurately, cascaded upwards – from the poor to the rich. In 1979, five million people in Britain lived below the poverty line. Today – even though we are told that the economy has never been in better shape – there are 14 million people living in poverty.[5](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-5)

Meanwhile, the rich grow richer … and richer … and richer. Today, according to the latest Sunday Times Rich List, just 1000 individuals – 0.002 per cent of the UK population – have a combined personal wealth totalling £180 billion. Such a sum of money is almost incomprehensible to mere mortals. It is more than ten times greater than the entire annual budget that the Scottish Parliament has to spend on health, education, housing, local government, emergency services, social services, and everything else it is responsible for. It is triple the Gross Domestic Product (ie the total amount of wealth, goods and services produced) of Nigeria, with over 100 million inhabitants.[6](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-6)

Speaking at a conference of the Women’s Institute in the year 2000, the New Labour Prime Minister assured the assembled gathering that he no longer believes in ‘egalitarianism that levels people down’. Tony Blair’s claim to have once believed in egalitarianism is perhaps open to dispute. But there’s no disputing his claim that he now rejects any notions of social equality. In the 12 months preceding his speech to the Women’s Institute, the wealth of Britain’s richest 1000 people had grown by an astronomical £27 billion under a New Labour government, beating all previous records hands down.

It is true that some of the wealth of the rich does percolate down to other layers of society. In the City of London, Porsche and Ferrari dealers, cocaine dealers, champagne importers, and people who own high-class restaurants, exclusive fashion labels, and expensive jewellery shops are just some of the people who have benefited from the booming stock exchange.

But that’s about as far as the wealth of the City trickles. It doesn’t even trickle down the Thames as far as Bethnal Green or Tower Hamlets. In these areas, the ‘People of the Abyss’, as they were described by socialist writer Jack London at the beginning of last century, can still be seen, huddled under railway arches or bringing up children in damp, vermin-infested tenements.

Nor does the claim that the rich deserve more money because of their special talents stand up to serious scrutiny. Some people are more talented than others, there’s no argument about that. But the main talent possessed by most of Britain’s hyper-rich is a talent for being born into the right family.

We are repeatedly told that the old rigid lines of division between the classes have been erased from society. In Tony Blair’s Cool Britannia, we are informed, the old aristocracy is a dying breed. The class that once ruled over five continents is now forced to take to the streets in the type of protest demos traditionally associated with the working class for the right to gallop through the countryside in red coats and top hats shouting, ‘Tally ho!’

Times are changing and inherited wealth is on its way out, usurped by entrepreneurs who have clawed their way up the financial ladder by talent and sheer hard work. If they can do it, you can do it. That’s what we’re asked to believe – but is it true?

Every year for the past 12 years, the Sunday Times magazine has produced a league table of the richest people in Britain, with a potted biography of these individuals. The magazine confesses that it tends to be cautious in its estimates, because so much of the wealth of the rich is hidden away beneath a complex labyrinth of secret bank accounts, fictitious trust funds, and overseas investments. Even so, these understated figures reveal that the wealth of the mega-rich in Britain approximately tripled between 1995 and 2000.

It also shows that, contrary to Nouveau Labour mythology, most of them definitely don’t start out as bus drivers or stallholders at the Barras. Of the 50 richest people in Scotland, more than half inherited their businesses and property.[7](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-7) Some of that property can be traced back to the early Middle Ages, when the ancestors of today’s landowners marauded around the countryside looting and pillaging, like medieval versions of today’s gangland drug barons. Others took over businesses initially set up by their parents or grandparents.

Instead of tending to diminish over time, the trend towards inherited wealth intensifies as wealth becomes more and more concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. As the rich accumulate more and more wealth, the less of it they are able to spend themselves, and the more is left over to pass down to their descendants.

Nor is it true that the super-rich are mainly made up these days of talented footballers, pop stars, and other entertainers. Only two entertainers, Paul McCartney and Andrew Lloyd-Webber, and no sports stars make it into Britain’s top 100.[8](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-8)

Further down the list is DJ Chris Evans, estimated to be worth over £100 million. He at least has the good grace to be embarrassed about his income. ‘When you’ve got this much money, you can’t spend it all. Obscene is definitely the word for it,’ he points out.

Most of the ‘self-made rich’ don’t have any special talents, except perhaps for gambling. Although the public spotlight tends to focus on entrepreneurs such as Bill Gates or Stagecoach boss Brian Souter, most serious wealth is created not by investing in industry, transport, or communications, but by gambling on the stock exchanges, the property markets, and the currency markets. London-based billionaire George Soros, for example, once made £1 billion in a single week, betting against the pound on the international currency markets.

Of the 5000 people in the UK who earned over £500,000 last year, more than three quarters work in ‘financial services’.[9](../references/notes.html#chapter-2-9) That means they buy and sell shares, or they buy and sell currency, or they buy and sell currency or shares for other people, or they advise people which shares or currency to buy and sell. One thing they don’t do is produce anything of value, or provide any useful service to society. They simply shift money around.

At least the old ‘Captains of Industry’ were able to claim they built ships, or produced coal, or manufactured cars, or turned iron into steel. Of course, they did none of these things. They employed other people to build ships, dig coal, manufacture cars, and turn iron into steel, while they sat in boardroom meetings discussing balance sheets. That’s when they weren’t footering around on the golf course or sunning themselves on Mediterranean beaches. But today’s Great British financial entrepreneurs can’t even make the fictitious claim that they are useful.

Whenever firefighters, train drivers, miners, nurses, lorry drivers, cleansing workers, power workers, water workers, teachers, ambulance drivers, threaten industrial action, panic invariably sweeps through the corridors of power. Newspaper editors are mobilised to whip up hysteria against the discontented group of workers. Police are dispatched to the picket lines. Sometimes a state of emergency is even declared and the army put on standby.

But let’s imagine Britain’s property speculators, for example, were to go on strike. How on earth could the NHS possibly function? How could the transport system operate? How could the power grid continue to supply energy? Surely the army would have to be called in to take over the functions of these financial wizards?

The truth is that society would carry on functioning as normal. Even if the rich were to mount an all-out indefinite general strike involving every stockbroker, shareholder, investment analyst, fund manager, currency trader, property speculator, and company director, most of us would scarcely even notice the difference.

In the days of Queen Victoria, churchmen, industrialists, and politicians liked to pontificate about ‘the deserving poor’ and ‘the undeserving poor’. What we have today is a bloated upper class which could accurately be described as ‘the undeserving rich’. It constitutes a tiny fraction of society, yet it siphons off a huge chunk of wealth. Far from being indispensable, the average member of this exclusive club is about as about as useful and necessary as a gallstone in the bladder.