---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Twenty - Painting a Brighter Future"
date:   2015-01-10 16:57:03
categories: book
---
SOME PEOPLE HATE capitalism and its values, yet remain uneasy about socialism. One of their strongest misgivings is that a socialist society would be drab. They fear that a society based on social equality would be a monotonous, conformist society in which individualism is frowned upon and that there would be no room for talent or diversity.

People are, after all, unique. There are six billion human beings on the planet, yet so complex is our genetic make-up that each one of these six billion people has a different personality from everyone else. There may be national characteristics forged by historical, geographical, and economic circumstances. Communities may have developed their own shared value systems. But within these nations and communities, everyone has their own characteristics, their own special aptitudes and talents, their own particular combination of virtues and vices, their own inimitable use of language, their own idiosyncratic gestures and facial expressions. If you unexpectedly met one of your neighbours in a crowded street in a far-off city, you would recognise them immediately, so distinctive are individual human beings even in their superficial appearance.

Anyone who fears that socialism is about sameness, or that social equality is about uniformity, is one thousand per cent mistaken. They have spectacularly misunderstood what socialism is all about. Socialism is not about regimentation; it is about building a society where diversity, originality, individuality, creativity, and ingenuity will be allowed to truly flourish for the first time in human history.

One of the most extraordinary myths that has gained widespread acceptance across society, even on the part of people who should know better, is that capitalism encourages freedom and diversity. That was partially true in the early days of capitalism, when the rising merchant classes were forced to wage war against the kings and queens and lords and archbishops in order to break down the rigid authoritarian structures of feudalism.

Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, for example – which seems a harmless enough little romance to us today – was regarded back in the 16th century as a subversive piece of drama, because it promoted the ideal of a society where young people should be free to choose their own partners on the basis of mutual attraction.

In its day, the idea of free romantic love was as controversial as the recent row over Section 28 in Scotland; in the Middle Ages, the social norm was compulsory arranged marriage. Romeo and Juliet was written on behalf of the rising new merchant classes, who were striving to remove the petty restrictions of feudalism and create a society in which they would be free to pursue commerce and make themselves rich.

But capitalism in the 21st century has become as big an obstacle blocking the path of human development as feudalism in the 16th and 17th centuries. Ironically, this system which generates astonishing economic and social inequalities simultaneously breeds grey uniformity in all aspects of human art and culture. And, in an added twist, as capitalism develops economically, human society and culture becomes ever more standardised and monotonous

Travel to any city anywhere in the world and you’ll see the same fast-food restaurants – the McDonalds, the Burger Kings, the Kentucky Fried Chickens – selling the same bland food. The more modern the city is, the more tedious the architecture. People wear the same clothes with the same designer labels. Go into a bar – and the chances are there’ll be shillelaghs and Gaelic road signs hanging from the walls – and buy the same beer and listen to the same music on the jukebox. Go into the cinema and you’ll see the same Hollywood blockbusters, perhaps dubbed or subtitled into the appropriate local language. Turn on the TV and you’ll see Frasier and Friends and local variations of British soap operas and quiz shows.

Increasingly, we are living in a monocultural society driven by the power of money and subservient to the rule of profit. Have you ever wondered why Santa Claus wears a red coat with white trimmings? Perhaps it derives from some ancient tradition or denotes some special religious significance from centuries long past? Wrong. Santa wears red and white because these are the corporate colours of Coca-Cola. What we have been all too easily deluded into imagining is a traditional icon was actually devised as an advertising stunt in 1931 by Coca-Cola, who dressed up Father Christmas in the company’s distinctive colour scheme.

That was 70 years ago – and the power of corporate capitalism is a million times stronger today. More and more, it dictates which films we see, which TV programmes we watch, which music we listen to, which football team we support, which T-shirt we wear, which foods we eat, which beers we drink, which books we read. Fortunately, there are plenty of courageous writers, poets, publishers, musicians, film-makers, painters, sculptors, who refuse to sell their talent to the highest bidder.

In the past, Scotland used to churn out a disproportionately large number of world-class footballers for such a small nation. Sadly, those days seem to have vanished. But who would have imagined back then that Scotland would eventually emerge as a major force in the world of literature and film? With writers and poets such as James Kelman, Alasdair Gray, William McIlvanney, Iain Banks, Janice Galloway, Irvine Welsh, Alan Spence, Alison Kennedy, Alan Warner, Ian McEwan, Laura Hird, John Burnside, Tom Leonard, Edwin Morgan, Toni Davidson, Carol Ann Duffy, Robert Crawford, Duncan McLean, Don Paterson, Jeff Torrington, Jackie Kay, Michel Faber, Gordon Legge, Angus Calder, with film-makers such as Peter Mullan, Danny Boyle, Lynne Ramsay, Dave McKay, playwrights such as Liz Lochhead, David Greig, Stephen Greenhorn, internationally respected graphic novelists like Grant Morrison, and even JK Rowling and Ian Rankin (creators of Harry Potter and Inspector Rebus, respectively) and many, many others who could have swelled and multiplied even this short list of names, have spearheaded a cultural revolution which continues to sweep through Scotland. In the worlds of music and the visual arts, bands like Primal Scream, Belle & Sebastian and Travis, alongside artists like Peter Howson, Caroline McNairn, and Alison Watt, are only the tip of an equally big iceberg. All have combined talent with integrity.

That is no mean achievement in a world where talent, like everything else, has been turned into a commodity to be bought and sold. There are many scriptwriters today churning out formulaic Hollywood blockbusters who have the capacity to write literary masterpieces. There are artistic geniuses galore in the advertising industry who spend their lives churning out elaborately constructed lies on behalf of shareholders they have never seen.

But a much bigger waste of talent is the talent that never sees the light of day. Our education system, for example, is heavily geared towards exams. From primary school right up to university, the emphasis is on regurgitating information fed down from on high rather than on developing creative skills. Unlike the sons and daughters of the rich, few working-class children ever get the chance of individual tuition from experienced painters or musicians or writers. Often, whatever creative impulses they display as young children become stifled and eventually suppressed as they progress through an education system in which teachers are forced to battle it out daily in front of large classes with sparse resources and little back-up.

One of the most precious commodities of all is time. Life is short; yet we spent a ludicrously large proportion of our lives doing things that we don’t really want to do. It is an irony that some people from working-class backgrounds eventually develop talents that they would never have otherwise cultivated, such as writing, painting, musicianship, and sculpture, while they are serving lengthy prison sentences.

One of the central priorities of 21st-century socialism will be to progressively reduce the length of the working week. The technology probably exists even now on a European scale, if a proper inventory and assessment could take place, for a one-or two-day maximum working week across the board. Of course, such a step could not be taken overnight. It would require European-wide co-operation. It would involve a massive reorganisation of economic life and a huge expansion of training and education to redirect people from the more mundane occupations to professions such as teaching, nursing, and medicine.

But, even in the short term, and even in a small country like Scotland, a socially designed economy could immediately slash the working week to 30 hours, and eventually move towards a 20-hour and a ten-hour working week as the rest of Europe began to move in the direction of socialism. This, in turn, would allow a flourishing of art, literature, music, sport, drama, film, and other creative activities which few people have any time to devote to in our workaholic society.

Instead of paintings and sculptures being hidden away in art galleries in the more upmarket end of town, they would be everywhere. Pedestrian precincts, shopping malls, railway stations, residential streets will probably be lined with works of art. Writers and musicians could be paid by society as a whole, rather than from the proceeds of their books and records, a system that discriminates in favour of those artists who are commercially successful. Success would no longer be gauged primarily by sales and profit.

Over time, there would even be a blurring of the distinction between artists and the rest of society. Reduced working hours, the creation of a radical new education system accessible to everyone throughout their entire lives, a major shift in emphasis towards art and culture would enable everyone to become an artist in one sphere or another.

But competition is an important driving force of all human activity, some people will argue. Would a socialist society not be in danger of suffering from a surfeit of co-operation? Would it not lack the competitive edge that encourages people to strive for improvement, that inspires them to reach higher?

That is a fair point. Under capitalism, competition is extolled as the most important virtue of all, and its role in the development of society exaggerated out of all proportion. Nonetheless, it would be equally wrong to bend the stick too far in the opposite direction. Football is a co-operative sport, but it is also competitive. Without co-operation and teamwork, a football team is ragged and ineffective. But without competition, the game would be pointless. Who would play or watch a sport in which every contest ended in a draw?

Socialism would not seek to abolish competition, but to channel it in a different direction. There are two types of competition: negative, unhealthy competition, which is about exploiting, humiliating, injuring, killing, or conquering your opponent; and constructive, healthy competition, which is about testing your skills and talents against those of others, and in the process raising everyone’s standards.

Under capitalism there is little genuine healthy competition. Rivalry between businesses involves the bigger, wealthier corporations driving their weaker competitors to the wall. Rivalry between nations involves bigger, powerful states grabbing resources and territory from their smaller neighbours.

Even sport under capitalism has become, at least at its highest levels, a grotesque self-parody. In Scotland, senior football tournaments are all but auctioned off and sold to the highest bidders, with economic inequality among the clubs ensuring that the average match is as absurdly imbalanced as a bullfight or a foxhunt. In a socialist society, there could be wholesale redistribution of footballing revenues from the wealthy elite to the poorer clubs, and widespread democratisation of the game through the establishment of trusts and co-operatives.

In society as a whole, competition, far from being suppressed, could be directed away from the accumulation of money and power into more constructive channels, such as music, sport, literature, painting, film-making, songwriting, sculpture, architecture, or photography. Sport and popular culture could be subsidised in a future socialist society as ballet, classical music, and opera are in this society.

The mini cultural revolution that has occurred in Scotland over the past decade or so provides us with a tantalising glimpse of the talent which could be developed on a much wider scale in a society that seriously encouraged artistry and creativity. A talented array of ground-breaking fiction writers, poets, painters, film-makers, sculptors, comedy writers, playwrights, songwriters, and musicians representing diverse genres, backgrounds, tastes, influences, and ideological outlooks have emerged to add vibrancy and colour to Scotland’s once prison-grey cultural landscape.

Most great artists throughout history have been radical in outlook. Genuine art can never stand separate and apart from reality. Its principal task is to communicate something – an idea, an emotion, a story. Art which is merely about creating perfection of form, or music which is solely about producing pretty sounds is unlikely to gain respect. But artists can never be dictated to by the rest of society without the art itself becoming corrupted.

Socialism would encourage the development of art and culture without interfering with the work of the artist and without taking sides in controversies about which schools of art or literature are superior. In the inter-war period, Josef Stalin in the Soviet Union promoted a school of art known as ‘social realism’ or ‘proletarian culture’. Books, paintings, poetry all routinely glorified the working class, preached class struggle, and denounced the bourgeoisie. By contrast, the socialist writer and revolutionary, Leon Trotsky, argued that ‘Art must find its own road … The methods of Marxism are not its methods … The field of art is not one in which the party is called to command.’1

As technology develops, there would be even greater emphasis on the arts. Computers are already capable of dealing with intricate tasks that involve logic and reason. When it comes to performing complicated calculations, or retrieving or sorting data, electronic intelligence has left the human brain light years behind.

But what the human brain with all its subtleties of consciousness and subconscious can do that computers cannot is defy the laws of logic. Humans are not just intellects and physiques – they are complex emotional beings capable of experiencing and conveying passion, humour, rage, jealousy, sorrow, love, hatred, sympathy, and a range of other feelings that are the raw materials of art, poetry, literature and music.

Unless, like mainstream pop music or pulp fiction, it can make pots of money for big business, creativity is marginalised in today’s society. The so-called ‘higher arts’ are jealously guarded by self-perpetuating elites, who treat classical music, ballet, opera, art, and poetry as their own private property, with the gates bolted and barred to prevent the uncouth masses gaining access. But in a socialist society, all forms of art and entertainment will become an integral part of day-to-day life for everyone.

No-one can foretell at this stage exactly how socialism will evolve decades and generations into the future. As the French revolutionary Auguste Blanqui once said, ‘Tomorrow does not belong to us.’ Those who inherit socialism will shape it and mould it themselves, in accordance with the needs of future generations. All we can say for sure is that a new democratic economic system will usher in a revolution in culture, art, sport, morality, human relationships, everything.

Education, using the most advanced computer technology, would be open to everyone, with no age limits or restrictive hours. Other aspects of society could also be transformed. The philosophy of 21st-century socialism will be essentially libertarian. Capitalism combines economic libertarianism with social authoritarianism. Its power structures protect the right of big business to do exactly what it pleases, how it pleases, when it pleases. Yet ordinary people are subjected to masses of petty rules, regulations, and restrictions.

Someone caught in possession of a few grammes of a relatively harmless drug such as cannabis can be sent to jail; yet the owners of giant factories which churn out cigarettes or super lager, which cause death and misery on a mass scale, are rewarded with wealth, honours, and status.

Socialism in the 21st century will be the opposite of capitalism: it will combine economic regulation with social libertarianism. Everyone accepts the need for laws and law-enforcement agencies. No responsible person would oppose laws against drunk driving, or laws against mugging, or laws against racist attacks, or laws against rape, or laws against child abuse. But a new socialist Scotland could sweep away oppressive laws such as the current anti-trade-union laws, which are the most repressive in all of Europe. It could remove from the statute books legislation such as the Criminal Justice Act, which seeks to criminalise people on the basis of their lifestyles.

It could overhaul the drugs laws, introducing controlled legalisation of relatively harmless soft drugs while treating hard-drug abuse as a medical and social problem rather than as a criminal offence.

It could democratise the legal system from top to bottom. The £150,000 judges, who, in the words of the writer William McIlvanney, ‘are as removed from the lives of the working class as the Dalai Lama’, could be replaced by elected panels representative of the real world.

In a future socialist society, even the human personality itself is likely to change over the course of generations. In today’s world, values such as greed, selfishness, and ruthlessness are extolled, or at least tolerated, because the people who shape the moral atmosphere have themselves risen to the top by behaving greedily, selfishly, and ruthlessly. In a future socialist society, virtues such as co-operation, generosity and solidarity would become the values most admired.

Human relationships would no longer be forced into traditional straitjackets. Attitudes and behaviour that are regarded as ‘natural’ in one society are often denounced as ‘unnatural’ in another. Genuine socialism would be a society of independent citizens all free to choose their own lifestyle. It would promote tolerance and celebrate diversity rather than forcing people to conform. In all spheres of human activity, the emphasis of 21st-century socialism will be on individual freedom on personal matters, combined with collective decision-making on the wider problems of society.

In 1909, in his classic book, Penguin Island, the writer Anatole France exposed the sham of ‘equality before the law’ in a class-ridden society. ‘The law, in its majesty equality, forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets and to steal bread.’

Similarly, the ‘freedom of choice’ which we are all supposed to enjoy under capitalism is phoney to the core. Sure, we’re all free to choose how we live our lives. We can choose to live in a detached mansion, or in a two-bedroom council flat. We can choose to eat in the Malmaison restaurant, or in Burger King. We can choose to develop our artistic, literary, or musical talents, or spend a third of our waking lives working in a job we don’t even like.

For a privileged minority, these choices are real. For the vast majority, they are a mirage. Indeed, for billions of poverty-stricken people across the world, even the idea of living in a council flat, eating in Burger King, and working in an office would appear like nirvana.

Like a plant that has been deprived of water and light, the human personality has never yet had the chance to flower to its full potential. While society is shaped by the power of money, it never will. But, in the classless socialist society of the future, every human being will at least be allowed the opportunity to develop their skills, talents, and intelligence, and to live life to the full.