---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Four - Shifting The Blame"
date:   2015-01-10 15:40:03
categories: book
---
THE BRAZILIAN ARCHBISHOP, the late Dom Camara, once made a penetrating observation which caused uproar within his own Church hierarchy, ‘When I feed the poor, they call me a saint. When I ask why they are poor, they call me a communist.’

So why are they poor? New Labour thinks it knows the answer. The poor are poor, according to government Ministers, because they choose to be poor. Welfare benefits are too generous and encourage ‘dependency’. That’s why we have a huge ‘underclass’ which drains the economy dry.

‘We are planning a new crackdown on the workshy,’ says Chancellor Gordon Brown. ‘There are job vacancies in every region of Britain and people able to work have no excuse for not filling them.’

His colleague, Alistair Darling, repeatedly threatens ‘tough new penalties for the workshy’. With a flourish he declares, ‘We have decided to end the something for nothing culture.’ Unfortunately, he was not issuing advance notice of the pending abolition of the monarchy. His target was lone parents and disabled people. Lone mothers would now be targeted for compulsory interviews under threat of benefit withdrawal, while thousands of people on Incapacity Benefit would be forced back to work. ‘Too many men in their 50s and 60s are on Incapacity Benefit when they should be working,’ preached the former left-wing socialist, now a rising New Labour star.

One of these men being targeted by Alistair Darling is 55-year-old Billy, from the South Side of Glasgow. He looks after his 80-year-old invalided mother and receives £73 a week Incapacity Benefit, plus £62 Industrial Injuries Benefit. Billy left school 30 years ago and started work as an insulating engineer working with dangerous asbestos. He now has serious respiratory problems, and, like tens of thousands of men of his generation in the Clydeside area, has a high risk of contracting lung cancer because of his exposure to the poisonous mineral.

Billy later worked as a scaffold erector and spent years of his life literally inches away from plunging hundreds of feet to his death. He has also worked in the ICI plant at Grangemouth where he handled dangerous chemicals. Billy’s working life ended after he was pinned against a wall by a forklift truck, which crushed the two main bones in his back like Oxo cubes. Ever since, he has suffered constant pain.1

Mr Darling has lived a rather different life. He attended the exclusive Loretto School on the outskirts of Edinburgh which charges £12,000 a year in fees – double the amount that Billy has to live on, six times the amount that a single unemployed person has to live on, and £4500 more than a worker on the national minimum wage will earn in a year. After leaving school, Mr Darling became a solicitor, an advocate, then a Labour MP. He is now a Cabinet Minister on a £100,000-a-year salary, plus lavish expenses. He recently tried to buy a new house in Edinburgh: a 13-room former nursing home, which eventually sold for half a million. Like most of the politicians and media pundits who pontificate about ‘spiralling welfare costs’ and ‘the culture of dependency’, Alistair Darling, designated New Labour’s ‘Poverty Tsar’, has as much first-hand experience of poverty as he has of life on the planet Pluto.

The truth is, welfare spending is not spiralling out of control. In the last 20 years, it has risen just two and a half per cent in the UK relative to Gross Domestic Product. This is despite the fact that the population has aged dramatically during that period, the number of single-parent households has multiplied six-fold, and whole regions of the country have been reduced to a state of permanent economic depression.

Nor is it true that the Treasury coffers are being gobbled up by an army of idlers and scroungers attracted by a life of splendour on £40 a week dole payments. Only five per cent of welfare spending goes to the unemployed. A large part of the welfare budget goes to pensioners, who have worked all their lives. Another big chunk goes to people whose health has been destroyed as a result of years of heavy manual labour. And a vast amount goes to people who do work, but are paid such pitiful wages by their employers that they are forced to claim benefits to feed and clothe their families.

Blaming welfare payments for poverty or unemployment is as logical as blaming firefighters for fires, or blaming doctors for ill health. Why do unemployment levels vary from twelve per cent in the East End of Glasgow to less than two per cent in Grampian, when benefit payments are exactly the same in both parts of Scotland? How come there was a vast ‘underclass’ in the 1930s, when there was no welfare state? And why, after the welfare state was established following the Second World War, did the economy not collapse as multitudes of workers left their factories and offices to join the ‘something for nothing brigade’? Why, indeed, did unemployment not only decrease instead, but almost cease to exist in the few decades after the welfare state was established?

It’s not necessary to have a PhD in economics to work out the solutions to these questions. The simple truth is that poverty and unemployment are not caused by the poor and the unemployed – they are caused by the rich and powerful. The decisions which lead to depressions, recessions, slumps, redundancies, closures, and lay-offs aren’t taken in the back streets of Easterhouse or Craigmillar – they’re taken in the boardrooms of big business, by company chairmen and chief executives.

Moreover, bizarre as it may seem, the people who do take the decisions to increase poverty and unemployment are never penalised. Instead they are handsomely rewarded. For example, Jack Welch, the chief executive of the giant American multinational, General Electric, slashed the payroll of the company by over 100,000 in eight years. He closed or sold 98 factories. But by making these savage economies, he increased the company’s annual profits from $1.5 billion to $9.3 billion dollars. And, as a reward for his butchery, Mr Welch picked up almost $100 million – 2500 times the salary of the average General Electric employee.2

Recently, in Britain, the chief executive of Barclay’s Bank, Matt Barnett, announced a 30 per cent surge in profits to just under £2.5 billion. The shareholders were naturally delighted at this windfall, which was achieved partly by axeing 7500 jobs. But Mr Barnett says he’s still not satisfied. His aim now is to double the bank’s profits every four years. And as the first step on the road to achieving that goal, he will cut £1 billion from costs, slash thousands more jobs and close down hundreds of High Street branches.

To the workforce of Barclay’s, who delivered that 30 per cent profit increase, Mr Barnett warns ‘there will be no excuses, no sacred cows, no delusions’.

He will be demanding, he says, ‘a more rigorous value-based management framework’, which is business gobbledygook for insisting that the remaining staff work even harder to make even fatter profits for the shareholders.3

Here in Scotland, the directors of the Royal Bank of Scotland have pledged to wipe out 20,000 jobs, following their triumphant takeover of the Nat West Bank. The top executives will no doubt be handsomely rewarded for their business acumen. They will receive bonuses equal to a lifetime’s salary for the average Royal Bank employee. They can possibly even expect knighthoods and other baubles and titles from the government. Yet by sacking 20,000 staff, the management of the Royal Bank is likely to cost the taxpayer up to £150 million, including the cost of welfare benefits and lost tax revenues.

In the Third World, the corporate godfathers perpetrate some of the most abominable crimes against humanity imaginable, to drive up profit margins. Impoverished states are stripped bare of their natural resources. Workers are turned into industrial and agricultural slaves. Farmers are ruthlessly ripped off and governments have guns held to their heads by transnational companies demanding that trade unions are outlawed, public services are dismantled, and tax rates lowered.

Glasgow-based tea-producing company, James Finlay, employs 51,000 workers across the globe in its vast tea plantations. The average wage per employee of the company in 1996 was £772, or £14 a week.4 When you buy a jar of coffee sold in a supermarket for £3.00, just 15 pence goes to the farmer in the tropics who produces the coffee bean. The rest is ripped off by giant companies like Nestlé and Allied Lyons and by supermarkets like Asda and Sainsbury. When you buy a bunch of bananas, 90 per cent of the cash you pay goes to the supermarket and to multinationals like Chiquita and Del Monte, who control the trade. When you buy a bar of chocolate for 45 pence, the farmer in Ghana who produces the cocoa bean will be paid a quarter of a penny.5

Despite the mountain of evidence condemning these corporate mercenaries, New Labourites and old Tories alike grovel at their feet and encourage them to pile up even more profit and cause even more unemployment and poverty.

Speaking at the 2000 World Economic Forum in Davos, Tony Blair exhorted other European states to follow in the footsteps of the UK by liberalising markets, slashing state subsidies, and cutting back social regulation – in other words, by creating the best possible conditions for big business to make the biggest possible profits. Writing in Scotland on Sunday, New Labour guru John Lloyd explained the logic behind this Thatcherite vision: ‘New Labour wants capitalism to be dynamic – to produce the kind of surpluses which they can tax sufficiently to protect the losers.’6

We’re back again to the trickle-down theory – and it’s as bankrupt under New Labour as it was under Margaret Thatcher. While the poor need coercion and threats to force them out of poverty, the rich require incentives and inducements to entice them to make even more money. New Labour’s method of protecting the losers is nothing else if not unorthodox. ‘We’re making sure penalties for the unemployed will be harsher,’ said one government adviser quoted in the London Times.7

Meanwhile, capitalism is producing surpluses, monumental surpluses, the biggest surpluses in the whole of history. But New Labour is not ‘taxing them sufficiently to protect the losers’. Indeed, New Labour boasts that corporation tax on big business and capital gains tax on the rich is ‘the lowest in Europe’.8 The UK government has even blocked the modest proposal of other European governments for a ‘withholding tax’ on capital being moved across borders.

According to a Joseph Rowntree Foundation study published in December 1999, despite the booming stock exchange at that time, the number of people on very low incomes in Britain had increased by a million during the first two years of the New Labour government. While big business in Scotland and across the UK has amassed record profits, the proportion of children claiming free school meals and clothing grants in Glasgow’s schools is higher today than on the day Tony Blair entered Downing Street.

The Labour Party no longer talks about building a society based on equality. Instead, Tony Blair, with all the sincerity of a Mafia defence lawyer, produces an agonised expression and pledges to create a society of ‘equality of opportunity’. But ‘equality of opportunity’ is not equality. The National Lottery offers ‘equality of opportunity’. Everyone has the same chance of becoming a millionaire as everyone else. But, as we all know in our heart of hearts, even as we queue up in the post office on a Saturday morning, there is more chance of being struck by lightning than of becoming a millionaire by buying a lottery ticket. Still, as millions wait patiently for their giros or pensions to arrive, they can always console themselves with the knowledge that they’re actually participating in an equal-opportunities project.

As a matter of fact, society under New Labour does not even provide the same equal opportunity as the National Lottery. How can everyone have an equal opportunity when some people inherit vast amounts of wealth on the day they’re born? How can there be a society based on equal opportunity when there are fee-paying schools – open only to the children of wealthy parents – which virtually guarantee pupils entry to a top university? How can there be equal opportunity when students from working-class families have to work long hours in bars or call centres to pay their way through university while trying to study for exams? How can there be equal opportunity when many children live in damp, overcrowded homes with nowhere to do their homework or even to read in peace?

The long-term goal of New Labour is to transform Britain into a smaller version of the USA. Tony Blair regularly heaps glowing praise on ‘the American economic miracle’, which, he claims, ‘has created millions of jobs’. It may have created millions of jobs in the past ten years, as a result of the longest economic upswing in the country’s history, but it is a startling fact that there are now more people in the USA living in poverty today than there were a decade ago.

There are now 35.5 million Americans officially defined as poor, including 27 per cent of black and Hispanics and 23 per cent of all children. In New York, the richest city of the richest country of the world, a baby born today is more likely to die in its first year and has a lower life expectancy than a baby born in Shanghai.9

Even after almost a decade of economic upswing, the USA is now a more divided, unequal, and repressive society than the former semi-fascist concentration camps of Chile or Argentina. While stocks, shares, profits, and dividends have soared to previously unimaginable heights, 80 per cent of Americans have suffered either a fall or stagnation in their living standards. Even if the economy continues to grow, economists calculate that another 2.5 million people will descend into poverty within the next two years.10

It is true that new jobs have been created in America. But these are different from the jobs that have been ‘downsized’ by the big corporations or exported to the Third World. Overwhelmingly, the new jobs are the sweatshop jobs, which offer wages and conditions that no-one would have accepted in the past. But people have to accept them now, because the alternative is starvation.

In New York, if someone loses their workfare job, they get evicted from their homeless shelter. Women who lose their workfare job have their children taken into care. In San Francisco, workfare street sweepers are paid one third of trade-union rates and have their benefits docked if they are ten minutes late for a shift that starts at 6.30 am.11

Meanwhile, five million people in the USA, equivalent to the total population of Scotland, are either incarcerated in prison or are on probation. In the richest country in the world, which has just experienced the most prolonged period of economic growth in history, one person in 100 is in jail. This compares to one in 1000 in Britain, which in turn is the highest in Europe apart from Turkey.12

‘I have seen the future and it works,’ said the famous American journalist, Lincoln Steffens when he visited Russia in 1917. Tony Blair has seen the future for Britain in Washington, New York, and Los Angeles. It certainly works for the rich. It doesn’t work for the poor.

And therein lies the answer to the question posed by Archbishop Camara. The poor are poor and are growing poorer … because the rich are rich and are growing richer.