---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Nineteen - Less Equal Than Others"
date:   2015-01-10 16:55:03
categories: book
---
PRINCES STREET GARDENS is one of the more colourful parts of Edinburgh city centre. When the summer sun beats down on the lush green lawns, it’s hard to imagine that this urban oasis was once submerged under the notorious Nor’ Loch.

Back in the Middle Ages, women suspected of practising witchcraft would be thrown into the Nor’ Loch to establish whether or not they were guilty. If the wretched victim drowned, this meant she could be pronounced innocent. If she failed to drown, this was proof that she was indeed a witch, so she was burned at the stake.

Today, we shudder with horror at stories of medieval superstition and prejudice. Thankfully, we live in the enlightened 21st century, where bigotry and intolerance no longer exist. Unless you happen to be black or Asian, that is. Or unless you happen to be gay. Or you’re a Muslim, a Sikh, a Hindu, or a Jew. Or a Catholic in some parts of Scotland or a Protestant in others. Or you speak with an English accent. Or you’re a single parent. Or you’re in some way different from everyone else.

During the Euro 2000 tournament, England football fans were filmed brandishing Union Jacks and Flags of St George and chanting the most infantile racist claptrap. Oblivious to the irony, these swaggering bigots sang hymns of praise celebrating the ‘English victory’ in the Second World War, while spewing out notions of racial superiority which would have gladdened the heart of Adolf Hitler himself.

It would be foolish to pretend that Scotland is somehow morally superior to England or to anywhere else. There are parts of this country where the Asian community lives under a permanent reign of terror. Gay people are frequently targeted, not just for verbal abuse, but for violent physical attack and even murder. On the Saturday night of a Celtic-Rangers match, Glasgow city centre can sometimes resemble a war zone as alcohol-fuelled sectarian tribalism erupts into bloody violence.

On the other hand, there is no doubt that, overall, Scotland is gradually becoming a more tolerant society. In the inter-war years, the Borders-born writer, John Buchan, wrote of ‘fat Jews’, ‘blue-black dagos’, ‘filthy Kaffirs’ (ie black South Africans). His works are littered with derogatory references to races he clearly regarded as sub-human. Yet Buchan was exalted by the literary establishment, and was a respectable Tory politician, to boot.1

Nowadays, though some of the party’s policies have subtle racist undertones, even respectable Tory politicians are not quite so blatantly racist. The only open racist party that operates in Scotland, the fascist British National Party, received less than half of one per cent of the vote in the 1999 European elections – less than one tenth of the support gained by parties committed to the socialist transformation of society.

Even sectarianism, for generations the scourge of Scotland, is in long-term retreat. In the cosmopolitan Edinburgh of the 21st century, it’s hard to believe that a few generations ago, in 1936, a political party which stood for the expulsion of all Catholics from Scotland, took 31 per cent of the vote across the city. The party, Protestant Action, won a number of council seats and remained a major force in the capital throughout the 1930s. A similar vote was achieved by the Scottish Protestant League in Glasgow during the same period. More recently, at the end of the 1980s, Rangers supporters burned their scarves in protest at the signing of a Catholic footballer, Mo Johnston. Yet within a decade Rangers were regularly fielding more Catholics in their first team than their arch-rivals, Celtic – and the only bonfires in the West of Scotland these days take place on Guy Fawkes Night.

Anti-gay prejudice – homophobia – is also less pronounced than in the past, notwithstanding the hysterical crusade waged by tabloid newspapers and church leaders. In the postal referendum organised by the campaign to keep Section 28, fewer than one in four Scots voted to retain the legislation, despite the high-profile multi-million-pound campaign urging people to vote. In the only comparable referendum in recent times – the Strathclyde water referendum in 1994, which was also a postal ballot conducted along similar lines – three out of four people voted to keep water public.

Socialists welcome this changing culture for two reasons. Firstly, because genuine socialism is about encouraging tolerance and diversity and opposing coercion and repression. People who are gay, or black, or Jewish, or Muslim, or English, or Irish, have as much right to get on with their lives without harassment as people who have red hair, or people who wear baseball caps.

And secondly, because racism, bigotry, and sectarianism can only weaken the capacity of working people to organise themselves against exploitation and injustice. There have been many occasions in history when the rich and powerful have deliberately used such divisions to set ordinary people at each others’ throats – black against white, Protestant against Catholic, Hindu against Muslim, Christian against Jew. At its most extreme, racism and xenophobia can result in the barbarous bloodletting that has turned much of the Balkans into a hell on earth over the past decade or so.

At this stage, Western European racism, personified by people like Haider in Austria and Le Pen in France, has attempted to cultivate a more respectable image. But, faced with serious economic and social crisis in the future, politics could turn ugly even in some of the most apparently civilised countries.

Many people who would not dream of discriminating against another human being on the grounds of race or religion will nonetheless cheerfully accept discrimination on the grounds of sex. After all, on the face of it, sexism does not have the same potential for violent division as racism or sectarianism. We’ve all read about race riots and holy wars, but relations between the sexes are so intimately intertwined as to preclude such extreme conflict.

Certainly, prejudice against women tends to be more insidious than the irrational hatred that is the standard hallmark of racism, sectarianism, and homophobia. But it can and does lead to violence. There are infinitely more violent assaults by men against women in Scotland than there are racist or sectarian attacks. Most of these assaults take place in the home and, in the most extreme cases, end in murder. And most violence against women stems from traditional superstitions of male superiority that still hold sway even in the 21st century. For many centuries – indeed right up until the end of the 19th century – men were even entitled by law to use physical violence in the home to impose their authority over women

Just as racism, sectarianism, and homophobia have tended to lessen over the years, attitudes towards women, too, have undergone profound changes over the generations. At the beginning of the 20th century, no woman anywhere in the world was entitled to vote. By the late 20th century, a majority of women had won the right to vote, while a minority, including Margaret Thatcher, Benazir Bhutto, Indira Gandhi and Golda Meir, were even able to rise to positions of immense political power.

In the more advanced countries, women have achieved legal rights to equal pay, divorce, contraception, and abortion. Although housework still consumes vast amounts of time and energy, especially for women with young children, the development of household appliances, such as washing machines, cookers, fridge-freezers, vacuum cleaners, and microwave ovens, has relieved at least some of the drudgery that had been their lot. And increasingly, women have been drawn into the workplace – to the point where they now constitute the majority of the workforce in Britain.

These changes have led some women from more privileged backgrounds to draw the conclusion that equality between the sexes has already been achieved. Some of the most vocal feminists of the past now describe themselves as ‘post-feminists’. But while a minority of women, especially those from the more privileged social classes, have been able to take advantage of the new climate, the vast majority of women across the world remain doubly oppressed, doubly exploited, under capitalism.

On a global scale, almost 70 per cent of all work is carried out by women. Yet they receive ten per cent of the world’s income and own barely one per cent of the world’s wealth. Women make up just over 50 per cent of the world’s population; yet 70 per cent of people living in absolute poverty in the world today are women.3

Even in the most advanced liberal democracies, where formal legal equality has been enshrined in the statue books, women remain second-class citizens. In Scotland, even though girls tend to show more academic potential at school than boys, by the time they reach adulthood women are usually relegated to subordinate roles. Often, they work in the most low-paid soul-destroying occupations.

Three quarters of catering and basic-grade clerical workers are women. Women earn, on average, 20 per cent less than men. They shoulder most of the burden of child-rearing, housework, dealing with debt, and coping with domestic crises. Within local communities, it is invariably women who undertake the bulk of the unpaid voluntary work which makes life a little more bearable for children, for the elderly, and for others who would otherwise be socially excluded.

In the 19th century, the leader of the General German Workers’ Association, Ferdinand Lassalle, claimed that ‘The rightful work of women and mothers is in the home and family … women and mothers should absorb themselves in the cosiness and poetry of domestic life.’

If such attitudes were expressed today by a trade union or socialist leader, they would be treated with derision and contempt. In Britain today, 60 per cent of household breadwinners are women. Yet women still have a long hard road to travel before they arrive at social and economic liberation.

A lifestyle survey conducted in June 2000 by Top Santé magazine blew away the media myth of the 21st-century ‘superwoman’ who effortlessly juggles motherhood, family life, and a successful career with motherhood and family life. Of the 5000 women surveyed, 75 per cent considered themselves underpaid for the work that they do, 70 per cent said they were overworked; and 77 per cent believed that work-related stress was damaging their health. Overall, no fewer than 79 per cent of women said they were disillusioned with the world of work.

The survey showed that, in Scotland, 90 per cent of women do most of the household chores and shoulder most of the responsibility for the children, even where both partners are working full time. Instead of gaining social liberation, working women with children are gaining the worst of all worlds. They are forced to work full time in dead-end underpaid jobs to help pay household bills. They then return to face a second full-time job in the home. Life can become an endless treadmill of mind-numbing drudgery, mental stress, and physical exhaustion. And although today’s generation of women are more confident, more independent, and more free to make their own choices, they still endure many of the pressures that their mothers and grandmothers had to face.

Some women, naturally and understandably, blame men for women’s oppression. They believe women would be liberated if only men would change their attitudes. But the problem of sexual inequality runs much deeper. It is rooted in the basic structures of the society we live in.

The traditional family, as portrayed in TV adverts, is often held up as the only natural way for people to live. Yet the family, as we know it today, is a relatively recent institution. And like every other institution in society, the family unit has evolved and developed over many centuries, in line with economic changes.

In his pioneering work, Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State first published in 1886, Friedrich Engels traced the development of human relations from the earliest primitive societies. Some of the detail of the book could be corrected in the light of 20th-century anthropological discoveries. Nonetheless, Engels’ basic analysis of the evolution of the family has stood the test of time and scrutiny.4

He described how ancient tribal societies were characterised by social equality. Land was held in common and resources were shared out in a form of elementary socialism. In this type of society, relations between the sexes were much less rigid because there was no wealth to pass on to future generations – and therefore paternity was not considered all that important.

In his book, Highlanders: A History of the Gaels, the writer John MacLeod, ironically a partisan of the fundamentalist Free Presbyterian Church, provides precise corroboration of Engels’ description of ancient society. Although he seems slightly bemused at his discovery, MacLeod provides the following honest description of life in the early Highland clans:

‘Even more oddly, they had no institution of marriage. Men and women lived in what we would today call free love, and children were raised by the whole clan and not as part of a smaller family unit. As paternity would have been a matter of great argument – had they greatly cared – succession to all offices came through the female line.’

Although he fails to make the connection between the absence of private family structures and the absence of personal property, MacLeod goes on to explain that, in the Highlands at that time, ‘Land belonged to no individual but to the whole clan.’5

Later, when men began to personally acquire land, livestock, and slaves, they also began to wonder what would happen to their possessions after they died. The idea of the private family began to take root. Women became the property of their husbands, as did the children of the marriage. Then, after the death of the husband, land and other possessions were handed down through the generations.

In other words, the institution of marriage, rather than representing the highest expression of romantic love in the best Mills and Boon tradition, actually evolved as a business arrangement. Before that business arrangement was established, women were strong and equal to men. Afterwards, they became the private property of their husbands and the roots of discrimination and oppression were planted.

Many people choose to live in what are usually described as ‘traditional’ families. Many of these families are based on mutual love and support on a free and equal basis. For a lot of people – women, men, and children – family life can offer an oasis of affection, warmth, and security in a harsh and hostile world. But, for others, the traditional family can be a prison from which there is little prospect of escape. A quarter of all violent attacks take place in the home; most female murder victims die at the hands of their male partners; many others suffer psychological torture within the marital home, yet, because of economic and social pressures find it almost impossible to leave.6

Today, some politicians and church leaders campaign for a return to ‘traditional family values’ and insist on elevating the virtues of this type of family, sanctified by the marriage ceremony, above all other living arrangements. Backed by sections of the tabloid press, they denounce one-parent families, people who are gay or lesbian, and everyone else whose lifestyle doesn’t fit the conventional pattern. Yet many non-traditional families do provide love, compassion, and security for children.

Democratic socialism is an extremely tolerant philosophy. But one thing that a future socialist Scotland will not tolerate is intolerance. In 18th-century Scotland, ministers would implore church congregations to report any sins against the sexual moral code of Calvinism. Sinners thus exposed were forced to sit in a special seat in the Kirk called the ‘Creepie Chair’, where they were mercilessly denounced before the entire congregation. With the full force of his eloquent invective, Robert Burns scornfully lampooned this hypocrisy in poems such as Address to the Unco Guid:

‘Oh ye, wha are sae guid yersel’
Sae pious and sae holy,
Wi’ nowt to do but mark and tell
Your neebours’ faults and folly!’

[a]Today, the role of society’s moral Gestapo has largely been taken over by the tabloid press. Private lives are paraded across the front pages, the modern equivalent of the ‘Creepie Chair’. One-parent families, people who are gay or lesbian, and others who don’t conform to tradition and convention are treated as the enemies within, a subversive mob undermining the foundations of society.

But blaming one-parent families for undermining traditional values is like blaming reservoirs for the rain. It is to confuse cause and effect. Over the past 30 years, the number of one-parent families in Britain has multiplied six-fold; however, this is a symptom of the failure of the traditional structures of society, rather than the cause of that failure.

As a general rule, lone parents don’t choose to become lone parents. Contrary to the impression created by some journalists and politicians, most lone parents are not irresponsible teenagers who have deliberately become pregnant to scrounge welfare benefits and jump the housing queue. In fact, fewer than one in 20 are in their teens. Two out of three are separated, divorced, or widowed. And most live on the breadline. While seven per cent of married couples have a total income amounting to less than £150 a week, 59 per cent of lone parents are in this category. Whatever anyone may claim, single parenthood is no bed of roses.7

Yet, like Humpty Dumpty, traditional family values cannot be put back together again, either by introducing legislation or by waging moral crusades. The stresses and strains that bear down on women and men, distort their relationships, and damage the psychological and physical welfare of children, will not be relieved by trying to turn the omelette back into an egg.

A socialist Scotland would aim to shift major resources towards ensuring the welfare of children and towards relieving the drudgery and pressure that many women face. Instead of people being left to tackle these problems privately, they could be tackled socially.

Child care, for example, is a huge predicament for most women and families with young children With the decline of extended families, in which grandparents, aunts, and uncles would all tend to live in close proximity, women with young children can no longer rely on the broad network of support which their parents, and especially their grandparents, could count upon.

Within a socialist Scotland, a network of community crèches and round-the-clock child-care centres could be established. All workplaces over a certain size could be compelled to provide nursery facilities. The introduction of a shorter working week with flexible hours, and longer holidays synchronised with school holidays would allow women and men to spend more time with their children. By extending paid maternity and paternity leave to a period of several years – to be taken in any combination – parents could be freed to spend time with their young children without giving up their jobs or undermining their promotion prospects.

Within a socialist system, a radical new benefits system could be introduced that recognised the crucial social role that women in particular play. A parent who wanted to give up work to look after children full time, even to educate children at home, could be given that option.

Full-time carers – again mainly women – are scandalously exploited by society. They dedicate their lives to looking after people who are too old, too ill, or too infirm to look after themselves. Without their devotion and selflessness, our social services and health service would be at breaking point. Yet the average allowance paid to a full-time carer is just £40 a week. A socialist welfare system could guarantee at least the equivalent of the national minimum wage to all those who devote themselves full time to looking after children, elderly people, or disabled people.

In addition, social-support systems could be developed to break down the isolation of those confined to home full time, either because they are carers or because they are being cared for. This could include community-based adult education and training; breakfast, lunch, and dinner clubs; sporting and cultural activities; and safe, supervised play areas for children in every locality.

In a future socialist Scotland, even the time-consuming grind of domestic housework could be partly relieved by social initiatives. For example, high quality eat-in and take-away restaurants, offering good food at low prices, could be established in every neighbourhood. Door-to-door laundry, ironing, and even house cleaning, could be organised at community level for those who wanted to use such a service. Many affluent households today employ housekeepers, often at pitifully low rates of pay. By contrast, workers employed in community household services in a socialist Scotland would receive trade-union rates of pay and union-negotiated hours and conditions.

A 50–50 division of household labour between the sexes could also be encouraged by a socialist government. That is not to suggest that harmonious relationships can ever be imposed through legislation; but by providing the necessary social infrastructure, backed by serious financial resources, we could at least lay the foundations for a society based on genuine equality between the sexes.

A socially oriented society would be geared especially towards those who are most powerless in the privatised society we live in today. Young children, elderly people, those who suffer from severe disabilities, would no longer be treated as though they were some kind of burden, but would become valued members of society with an important contribution to make.

Not just human beings, but animals too, could be freed from needless physical and psychological suffering. Hunting with hounds, intensive factory farming, the export and import of live animals, cosmetic testing, and other forms of cruelty against animals would have no place in a future socialist Scotland.

It would be absurd to claim that economic and social changes alone can create a society of genuine equality, free from racism, sectarianism, prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination. These stains will take generations to wash away without trace. But, in the meantime, we can at least begin to move towards a society in which ideals such as solidarity, respect, and co-operation are elevated above values such as greed, cynicism, and ruthlessness.