---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter Six - Who Writes The Rules?"
date:   2015-01-10 15:53:03
categories: book
---
JUST AFTER THE first Scottish Parliamentary elections, journalist and cultural commentator, Pat Kane, wrote a column in the Sunday Herald newspaper in which he described himself as ‘a democratic capitalist’.

The revelation that a key member of the editorial staff of one of Scotland’s leading liberal newspapers describes himself as a ‘democratic capitalist’ doesn’t exactly qualify as the scoop of the decade. Yet, until recently, Kane, who first rose to fame as the lead singer of the band Hue and Cry, was proud to identify himself as a socialist.

Unlike many other intellectuals in the media and in politics who have forsaken their earlier beliefs in socialism and made their peace with the system, Pat Kane is no foaming-at-the-mouth reactionary. His writings are socially progressive on most issues. His commitment to democracy cannot be doubted.

There is, however, one fatal flaw at the heart of his new philosophy. The phrase ‘democratic capitalist’ is a contradiction in terms. It is no more possible to be a democratic capitalist than it is to be a meat-eating vegetarian.

Some people may think that’s a bit harsh. After all, in this country we’ve been brought up saturated with the spirit of democracy. A generation still alive today fought in a World War to defend democracy against Nazism. We have the right to vote, the right to strike, the right to worship as we please, the right to free speech, the right to join whatever political party we choose. What more could we ask for?

It’s true that in Western Europe we possess a whole range of democratic rights. The achievement of the right to vote, the right to strike, the right to organise, the right to free speech were monumental advances. Without these basic democratic rights most of the population would still be living in squalid slums and working in dark Satanic mills for a pittance. More than anyone, socialists value democratic rights and will fight ferociously to protect them.

But these democratic rights were not handed out like Christmas presents by the capitalist rulers of society. Each and every one of them had to be fought for long and hard. The Chartists of the early 19th century, for example, were furiously denounced by the politicians, the businessmen, the press, and the clergy. Their central demand – the right to vote – was regarded as an outlandishly revolutionary proposal by those in charge. In the early 20th century, the Suffragettes, too, were vilified as dangerous extremists threatening the very fabric of society.

Moreover, a handful of democratic rights don’t add up to a democracy, any more than a handful of trees add up to a forest. Abraham Lincoln once defined democracy as ‘government of the people, by the people, for the people’. That’s certainly what the ancient Greeks, who invented the word, meant by democracy. Translated into English, democracy means, literally, ‘rule by the people’.

Under capitalism, rule by the people is a political impossibility. Even elected governments have only limited powers over certain areas of government. In his book The Cancer Stage of Capitalism, John McMurtry quotes a top New York banker who told a radio interviewer, ‘We are like the supranational government of the world. Where we see politicians are doing things that are inappropriate, we hold their feet to the fire. And the way we do that is by moving a lot of money around. Politicians are irrelevant to the process.’

The real economic rulers of the world today won’t be found in parliaments or in presidential palaces. It is in the boardrooms of the big corporations and on the floors of the world’s stock exchanges that most of the key decisions are taken that affect the lives of ordinary people.

A company like General Electric employs 350,000 people in over 100 companies. Its annual revenues are greater than Scotland’s total Gross Domestic Product. It produces a mind-boggling range of products, from aircraft engines to computer disks, from X-ray equipment to nuclear power stations. It owns 220 different media subsidiaries including 13 TV stations in America, dozens of cable channels in 54 different countries, and scores of radio stations and Internet channels. It controls a vast empire of insurance companies, and even controls a number of top American sports teams and venues, including Madison Square Garden.1

Yet this whole operation is run by one man, John F Welch. He is just one of 1000 corporate chieftains who have become the 21st-century equivalent of the feudal kings and queens, except that their domain knows no geographical boundaries.

They have the power to destroy lives, impoverish communities, and topple governments without even leaving their offices. And they are accountable to no-one, except unelected boards of directors.

The power of these business moguls is reinforced by three giant institutions which together effectively act as the political wing of transnational capitalism. This gang of three – the World Trade Organisation, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund – work together to force national governments to accept ultra-right-wing free-market policies. They have forbidden governments to ban dangerous asbestos. They have forbidden countries to ban child labour. They have forbidden countries to ban trade with vicious dictatorships such as Burma. They have forbidden countries to produce cheap generic medicines, forcing them to buy instead expensive brands manufactured by the big drugs companies. They have demanded that countries slash public spending, reduce labour costs, and privatise public assets.

So who exactly are these institutions? When were they were elected? Who are they accountable to? In theory, they represent the 188 members of the United Nations. In practice, the seven richest countries – the so-called G7 – have the same number of votes as the other 181 countries combined.

Not many people in Britain have ever heard of Stephen Pickford. It would be fair to say he’s hardly a household name, even in his own household. He has never stood for public election in his life. Yet Mr Pickford is Britain’s representative on the World Bank and on the IMF. He was not even appointed by the Westminster parliament to these positions, nor is he accountable to parliament. In fact, incredible as it may seem, Stephen Pickford casts his vote, which amounts to five per cent of the total voting power on these bodies, in complete secrecy.

Political and economic power go hand in hand at every level of capitalist society, from the giant global institutions right down to local health boards and council services. In Scotland, for example, just 75,000 people – less than one in 50 of the adult population – earn more than £40,000 a year.2 Yet every MSP and MP, every senior civil servant, every senior editor of every national newspaper, every top TV and radio executive, every sheriff, every judge, every senior police officer, every major company director, every health board chief, every top council official, every quango boss in Scotland earns £40,000 and upwards. Indeed, most of them earn much, much more.

This means that the people who run Scotland – its economy, its media, its social services, its legal system, its governmental apparatus – are drawn from the wealthiest two per cent of the population. The other 98 per cent are effectively excluded from the running of society.

In his book Friends in High Places, Newsnight presenter Jeremy Paxman pointed out that seven out of the nine top army generals, two thirds of the directors of the Bank of England, 33 of 39 of Britain’s top judges, 100 per cent of ambassadors to the 15 most important countries in the world, 78 of the 84 Lord Lieutenants to the Queen, and the majority of the Bishops of the Church of England were educated at a handful of top private schools.

Paxman quotes the then Provost of Eton, Lord Charteris, who explains how society really functions in our modern parliamentary democracy: ‘The world is run on knowing the right people, actually. I’m sorry, but it is. Generations ago, if you were an old Etonian, if you were a member of the aristocracy, you knew the right people. Well, it’s just the same now, really. It’s just a lot bigger.’3

The rest of us have the right to vote every five years for an MP. We also have the right to elect MSPs and councillors every four years. That is clearly preferable to living under a totalitarian dictatorship. But even these elections are effectively rigged in favour of the parties that defend the status quo.

Earlier this year Brian Souter, the richest man in Scotland, splashed out £1 million in an attempt to stop the scrapping of Section 28, the law which bans teachers from acknowledging the existence of homosexuality. Labour politicians furiously condemned this use of wealth to buy political influence.

But that’s how politics works under capitalism. The food industry, the pharmaceuticals industry, the tobacco industry, the alcohol industry, and all major industries, for that matter, shell out mind-blowing sums of money to influence government policy. When Margaret Thatcher was forced to step down as Prime Minister, she became a £1 million-a-year lobbyist on behalf of the tobacco industry.

But at least our electoral system is fair. Or is it? Yes, it’s fair all right – in the same way that professional football is fair. All football teams play by the same rules. Each team consists of eleven players. The goalposts are exactly the same height and width. The pitch is more or less the same size at all grounds. On the face of it, every club should have an equal chance of success. But some clubs have a more equal chance than others. In Scotland, Celtic and Rangers have colossal wealth and resources, while teams like Cowdenbeath and Clydebank are run on a shoestring. As a result, the game is overwhelmingly weighted in favour of the wealthy clubs. Politics, too, is biased in favour of those parties who have plenty of cash to spend on leaflets, posters, full-time staff, offices, computers, press, and TV advertising.

In the past, big business channelled substantial sums of money into the coffers of the Tory Party. The Labour Party was financed by the trade unions. It still is, but increasingly, Britain’s multimillionaires are switching to New Labour. Others support the Lib Dems. Some even back the SNP. These political donations are never straightforward acts of philanthropy; there are always conditions. And the first condition that big business will always insist upon is that wealth itself is untouchable. This means that any party that stands even for modest redistribution of wealth is starved of resources. It may be allowed to compete in elections, but it can never hope to generate the same amount of cash to fight these elections as the pro-big-business parties.

That doesn’t mean that the pro-Establishment parties will always win. Sometimes a team like Inverness Caley or Berwick Rangers can take on and defeat the might of Celtic or Rangers against all odds. And socialists too can defeat the big-business parties, even on a playing field which is about as level as the north face of Ben Nevis. But while Rangers or Celtic may be prepared to accept defeat gracefully, big business and the rich are unlikely to give up their power and wealth quite so willingly. The coach of a losing football team may well just shrug his shoulders and prepare for next season or for the next tournament. But those who own and control society will rewrite the rules over and over again before they will concede defeat.

The monarchy, for example is not simply a decoration or a tourist attraction. Nor are our MPs and MSPs forced to swear an oath of allegiance to the monarchy for purely ceremonial purposes. To those who overthrew the monarchy in France more than 200 years ago this would have seemed utterly bizarre, but in 21st-century Britain, rather than the hereditary monarch being accountable to the elected government, the elected government is accountable to the hereditary monarch.

The reigning monarch has ‘reserve powers’ to dismiss governments. We are led to believe that these reserve powers are simple formalities, traditions that have been retained for purely sentimental reasons. In fact, they’ve been used within living memory. In 1975, the Queen’s governor-general in Australia sacked the Labour Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, who had been elected three years earlier and had introduced a whole series of reforms, including the abolition of conscription, equal pay for women, increased pensions, benefits, education and health spending, and had replaced ‘God Save the Queen’ with ‘Advance Australia Fair’ as the country’s national anthem.

Recently there has been much press speculation about the possibility of the Queen spending six months of the year in Holyrood Palace, of Prince Charles forging a higher profile north of the border, of Princess Anne being anointed Princess of Scotland, of Prince William attending a Scottish university. No-one should imagine that all of this attention is being lavished on Scotland because the Royal Family have decided they like our climate or our scenery. The fact is that the British ruling class are preparing contingency plans for the possible future break-up of the United Kingdom.

At some stage, the British Establishment may be forced to concede formal independence, for example, in the event that an SNP-led government in Holyrood called and won a referendom. But they will battle desperately to ensure that the Queen or another member of the Royal Family is appointed head of state of an independent Scotland as a bulwark to defend the power, privileges, and profits of the rich.

Ken Livingstone, now Mayor of London, once wrote a book called If Voting Could Ever Change Anything, They’d Abolish It, and as the old saying goes, there’s many a true word spoken in jest. Ultimately, the wealthy minority at the top of society will defend the status quo by whatever means necessary.

For the past 50 years or so, the rule of the rich has not been under serious threat in Britain. Although there has been the occasional Labour government to deal with, as a general rule, the ruling Establishment has been able to tame these governments by a combination of bullying and bribery.

On the one side, Labour leaders are bought off with lavish salaries, plush limousines, and all the trappings of wealth and success. The legendary left-wing Labour MP, Nye Bevan once described the pomp and ceremony of the House of Commons as a form of ‘ancestor worship’. From the day they walk in the door of Westminster or Holyrood, MPs and MSPs are flattered and patronised and made to feel part of a ruling Establishment. They are also awarded lavish lifestyles, which take them into a different stratosphere from the people who elect them. Even the basic salaries of backbench MPs or MSPs elevates them into the top two per cent of income earners.

On top of the £47,000 plus expenses they earn, many Westminster MPs make tens or even hundreds of thousands of pounds more from consultancies, directorships, journalism, and speaking engagements. In the early 1990s, Marc Hollingsworth, a journalist on Granada TV’s World in Action, undertook an investigation into the world of political lobbying. He found that the House of Commons had become a ‘commercial marketplace’, and 384 MPs had business interests, including 552 directorships and 452 consultancies.

But just to make sure they don’t step out of line, big business also browbeats elected Labour governments into submission with threats of economic chaos if they dare interfere with the vested interests of the rich. In Scotland, some financial institutions even threatened to relocate south of the border if New Labour dared to establish a Scottish Parliament. The same companies now warn that they will pull out if Scotland ever moves towards full independence.

Sometimes more extreme measures are called for. In the late 1970s, when Tony Benn was building mass support among the rank and file of the Labour Party, the respected investigative journalist Duncan Campbell was contacted by a former British Intelligence secret agent. When Campbell went to meet the agent, he was provided with a dossier of evidence which made his hair stand on end. Here, in black and white, was a plot to assassinate Tony Benn in the event that he should take over as Labour leader.

This plan to ‘eliminate’ Benn was no madcap scheme being touted around the ultra-right-wing fringes of British politics. In fact, at the heart of the criminal conspiracy was Airey Neave, a Tory Shadow Cabinet Minister and a close adviser to Margaret Thatcher.

While Airey Neave was still alive, the agent was too afraid to reveal his name. As a result, the magazine Duncan Campbell worked for, the New Statesman, held onto the story. Two years later, Airey Neave was murdered in an IRA car bomb attack and the agent was now prepared to go public. The New Statesman published the revelations, but the mainstream British press imposed a total news black-out on the story.4

This was not the first time in recent years that a section of the British Establishment had dabbled with the idea of violently destroying an elected government. In 1968, elements of the British Establishment drew up a contingency plan to stage a military coup against Harold Wilson. Again, in 1974, just months after General Pinochet’s CIA-backed coup against a democratically elected socialist government in Chile, top military officers and prominent businessmen met to discuss the possibility of taking similar action in Britain if the Labour government moved too far to the left.5

Their plans proved unnecessary. Under pressure from the International Monetary Fund and big business, the Labour government did what it was told. Its manifesto was torn up into small pieces and scattered to the winds, while the rich rubbed their hands with glee.

That’s British democracy. It’s like a rigged boxing tournament, where the fighter in the blue corner always wins and the fighter in the red corner always loses. And, if there’s ever any chance that the red corner will be victorious, the referee will call the fight to a halt and declare the blue corner the winner.

Or at least that’s what happens if you play by the rules laid down by the rich and powerful. That’s what happened time and time again during the 20th century. And that’s why, in the 21st century, we need to tear up the old rule book and establish a new set of rules.